Source: C:\Users\10\Downloads\lectures\pdf\vncC9PrCI5.pdf\nConverted: 2025-09-28 04:55:27\nPages: 284\nOCR: Enabled\n================================================================================\n\n\n=== PAGE 1 ===\n\n\n=== OCR PAGE 1 ===\nWiley Trading Series WEB
ms ITE

BUILDING
WINNING
ALGORITHMIC

TRADING
SYSTEMS

A TRADER’S JOURNEY
FROM DATA MINING
TO MONTE CARLO SIMULATION
TO LIVE TRADING

KEVIN J. DAVEY

WILEY
\n\n=== PAGE 2 ===\n\n\n=== PAGE 3 ===\nBUILDING WINNING
ALGORITHMIC 
TRADING SYSTEMS
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 3 ===\nBUILDING WINNING
ALGORITHMIC
TRADING SYSTEMS
\n\n=== PAGE 4 ===\nThe Wiley Trading series features books by traders who have survived the market’s 
ever changing temperament and have prospered—some by reinventing systems, 
others by getting back to basics. Whether a novice trader, professional, or some-
where in between, these books will provide the advice and strategies needed to
prosper today and well into the future. For more on this series, visit our Web site 
at www.WileyTrading.com.
Founded in 1807, John Wiley & Sons is the oldest independent publishing com-
pany in the United States. With offi ces in North America, Europe, Australia, and
Asia, Wiley is globally committed to developing and marketing print and electronic
products and services for our customers’ professional and personal knowledge
and understanding.
\n\n=== PAGE 5 ===\nBUILDING WINNING 
ALGORITHMIC 
TRADING SYSTEMS 
A Trader’s Journey from Data Mining to
Monte Carlo Simulation to Live Trading
Kevin J. Davey
\n\n=== PAGE 6 ===\nCover Design: Wiley
Cover Image: © iStockphoto/Emilia_Szymanek
Copyright © 2014 by Kevin J. Davey. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by
any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as permitted un-
der Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior written permission 
of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clear-
ance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 646-8600, or on the
Web at www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the Permissions
Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, (201) 748-6011, 
fax (201) 748-6008, or online at http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best eff orts in
preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness 
of the contents of this book and specifi cally disclaim any implied warranties of merchantability or fi tness for a
particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales representatives or written sales materials. 
The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable for your situation. You should consult with a
professional where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss of profi t or any
other commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental, consequential, or other damages.
For general information on our other products and services or for technical support, please contact our
Customer Care Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the United States at
(317) 572-3993, or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley publishes in a variety of print and electronic formats and by print-on-demand. Some material included 
with standard print versions of this book may not be included in e-books or in print-on-demand. If this book 
refers to media such as a CD or DVD that is not included in the version you purchased, you may download this 
material at http://booksupport.wiley.com. For more information about Wiley products, visit www.wiley.com.
Davey, Kevin, 1966-
 Building algorithmic trading systems, + website : a trader’s journey from data mining to Monte Carlo 
simulation to live trading / Kevin Davey.
  1 online resource. — (Wiley trading)
 Includes index.
 ISBN 978-1-118-77891-3 (pdf) — ISBN 978-1-118-77888-3 (epub) — ISBN 978-1-118-77898-2 (pbk.)
1. Futures. 2. Portfolio management. 3. Investment analysis. 4. Monte Carlo method.
5. Electronic trading of securities. I. Title.
 HG6024.A3
 332.64′2028567 — dc23
2014014899
Printed in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
\n\n=== PAGE 7 ===\nTo Amy, Owen, Kathryn, Andrew, and Guardian Angel Anthony—
My love, my children, my life
\n\n=== PAGE 8 ===\n\n\n=== PAGE 9 ===\nvii
C O N T E N T S
Acknowledgments 
ix
About the Author 
xi
Introduction 
1
PART I
A TRADER’S JOURNEY 
7
CHAPTER 1
The Birth of a Trader 
9
CHAPTER 2
Enough Is Enough 
15
CHAPTER 3
World Cup Championship of Futures 
Trading® Triumph 
23
CHAPTER 4
Making the Leap—Transitioning to Full Time 
33
PART II
YOUR TRADING SYSTEM 
41
CHAPTER 5
Testing and Evaluating a Trading System 
43
CHAPTER 6
Preliminary Analysis 
53
CHAPTER 7
Detailed Analysis 
61
CHAPTER 8
Designing and Developing Systems 
71
PART III
DEVELOPING A STRATEGY 
77
CHAPTER 9
Strategy Development—Goals and Objectives 
79
CHAPTER 10
Trading Idea 
83
\n\n=== PAGE 10 ===\nviii
CONTENTS
CHAPTER 11
Let’s Talk about Data 
93
CHAPTER 12
Limited Testing 
103
CHAPTER 13
In-Depth Testing/Walk-Forward Analysis 
115
CHAPTER 14
Monte Carlo Analysis and Incubation 
129
CHAPTER 15
Diversifi cation 
133
CHAPTER 16
Position Sizing and Money Management 
139
CHAPTER 17
Documenting the Process 
147
PART IV
CREATING A SYSTEM 
153
CHAPTER 18
Goals, Initial and Walk-Forward Testing 
155
CHAPTER 19
Monte Carlo Testing and Incubation 
163
PART V
CONSIDERATIONS BEFORE GOING LIVE 
175
CHAPTER 20
Account and Position Sizing 
177
CHAPTER 21
Trading Psychology 
187
CHAPTER 22
Other Considerations before Going Live 
195
PART VI
MONITORING A LIVE STRATEGY 
203
CHAPTER 23
The Ins and Outs of Monitoring a Live Strategy 
205
CHAPTER 24
Real Time 
219
PART VII
CAUTIONARY TALES 
233
CHAPTER 25
Delusions of Grandeur 
235
 
Conclusion 
243
APPENDIX A
Monkey Trading Example, TradeStation Easy
Language Code 
247
APPENDIX B
Euro Night Strategy, TradeStation Easy
Language Format 
255
APPENDIX C
Euro Day Strategy, TradeStation Easy 
Language Format 
259
About the Companion Web Site 
263
Index 
265
\n\n=== PAGE 11 ===\nix
 A C K N OW L E D G M E N T S  
 T
here are many people without whom this book, and my trading career, would
not have been possible. First on the list are my Mom and Dad. They stressed 
self‐reliance and taking responsibility for one’s actions. These are great traits for 
everyone to have, and they are really critical for traders. I owe my start to them.
 Of course, none of my success would have been possible without my great wife, 
Amy. Imagine a spouse who fully supported her husband as he walked away from a 
great career to become a trader, an endeavor where 90 percent of people fail. Her 
support has been 100 percent positive, and I cannot imagine surviving as a trader, 
and a person, without it. She is one in a million, and I’m lucky to have found her. 
 Finally, this book would not be possible without the many traders and wannabe 
traders who have contacted me over the years. Realizing my words actually helped 
individuals avoid the many unscrupulous people in this industry gives me great joy. 
I hope reading this book helps you in the same way.
 Happy Trading! 
 Kevin J. Davey
 May 2014
\n\n=== PAGE 12 ===\n\n\n=== PAGE 13 ===\nxi
 A B O U T  T H E  A U T H O R  
 K
evin Davey is a professional trader and a top‐performing systems developer. He 
generated triple‐digit annual returns 148 percent, 107 percent, and 112 percent 
in three consecutive World Cup of Futures Trading Championships® using algorithmic
trading systems . His web site, www.kjtradingsystems.com, provides trading systems, 
trading signals, and mentoring. He writes extensively in industry publications such as 
Futures Magazine and Active Trader
 
 and was featured as a “Market Master” in the book 
r
The 
Universal Principles of Successful Trading by Brent Penfold (Wiley, 2010). Active in social
media, he has over 15,000   Twitter followers.  An aerospace engineer and MBA by 
background, Davey has been an independent trader for over 20 years. Davey continues 
to trade full time and develop algorithmic trading strategies . 
\n\n=== PAGE 14 ===\n\n\n=== PAGE 15 ===\n1
 I N T R O D U C T I O N  
I
wanted to throw up. The bile in my stomach had reached an unsustainable level, 
but there was no bathroom near me. Speeding down the freeway at 75 miles per
hour, with no exit in sight, I’d have to swallow hard and accept my fate. I really
wanted to just curl up and die. Well, not exactly. I wanted to vomit fi rst, then curl
up and die.
 Was it trichinosis from eating pork not cooked to shoe leather consistency, as my 
Mom always predicted would happen? Nope. An undercooked juicy red hamburger
laced with  E. coli? Not exactly. It was meat that was the culprit, but in the form of live 
cattle. Live cattle futures, to be exact. Live cattle, all 40,000 pounds of them, had led 
to my sudden urge to vomit. Specifi cally, bovine spongiform encephalopathy, more
commonly known as mad cow disease. I didn’t have the disease, but my ill‐fated
speculative investment did. 
 This was at the end of December 2003, a month that had started with great per-
sonal and professional promise. I recently had been promoted to vice president of 
quality assurance at Argo‐Tech, the midsize aerospace fi rm I was lucky enough to
be part of, before it was bought out by a soulless mammoth corporation. I also had
been honored as a “40 Under 40” recipient from Crain’s Cleveland Business magazine—
s
recognized as one of Cleveland, Ohio’s, up‐and‐coming business stars under the age 
of 40. My futures trading account was doing pretty well, to the point where I felt
confi dent I knew what I was doing (many times that feeling is soon followed by a slap
in the face by the market, but I digress). Finally, my fi rst child was on the way in a 
few months. All things considered, I was on a roll.
 Then disaster struck. Three times. Quickly. 
 On December 12, 2003, my beautiful and amazing wife Amy and I had our fi rst 
son, Anthony. He was two months premature and was stillborn. The joy of planning
\n\n=== PAGE 16 ===\n2
INTRODUCTION
for the arrival of our fi rstborn suddenly and tragically became planning for a fu-
neral and burial. It is nearly impossible to understand the gut‐wrenching pain that 
comes with losing a child, until it happens to you. I certainly was not prepared for it.
Dreams were destroyed that day, life suddenly became unfair, hope and joy seemed 
a distant memory. Needless to say, Amy and I were both mentally, physically, and 
emotionally devastated.
 Less than a week later, on December 17, the second calamity hit. My father passed 
away on his 75th birthday. Ironically, after three open‐heart bypass surgeries over the 
previous 30 years, it was not his clogged arteries that got him, but cancer—a nasty 
cancer that is common to chimney sweepers. That made sense, I suppose, since he 
was a fi refi ghter, and in his prime chased many raccoons out of chimneys, as the co‐
owner of a pest control company. After watching him lying in bed while life slowly 
left his body, my head began spinning like a top. To say I could not think straight was
an understatement. 
 With two such life‐changing events within a week, you probably would guess that 
I would not be trading or taking up any other type of mental and emotional task. 
But you’d be wrong. I was still trading. Looking back on it now, I was completely
crazy to trade. Yet I did. On December 23, about an hour or so before the close, on a
whim I decided that I should buy live cattle futures. I’m sure I had my reasons, but I 
am equally sure that those reasons were contrived by my mind in order to justify the 
trade. I wasn’t in my right mind at all. I had no business trading.
 I’m sure you know how this story ends. After the close on December 23, the U.S. 
Department of Agriculture announced that a case of mad cow disease was found in 
the United States. The impact on the market would be terribly negative. Since I was 
long cattle futures, and the market was certainly headed for a free fall, my account 
was in for a slow death, temporarily slowed only by the daily limits in the futures 
markets. I could only lose $600 per day per contract, at least until the exchange ex-
 FIGURE 0.1  Mad Cow Disease Causes Live Cattle Futures to Collapse 
Mad cow disease
announced after the
close
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 16 ===\nINTRODUCTION | &

for the arrival of our firstborn suddenly and tragically became planning for a fu-
neral and burial. It is nearly impossible to understand the gut-wrenching pain that
comes with losing a child, until it happens to you. I certainly was not prepared for it.
Dreams were destroyed that day, life suddenly became unfair, hope and joy seemed
a distant memory. Needless to say, Amy and I were both mentally, physically, and
emotionally devastated.

Less than a week later, on December 17, the second calamity hit. My father passed
away on his 75th birthday. Ironically, after three open-heart bypass surgeries over the
previous 30 years, it was not his clogged arteries that got him, but cancer—a nasty
cancer that is common to chimney sweepers. That made sense, I suppose, since he
was a firefighter, and in his prime chased many raccoons out of chimneys, as the co-
owner of a pest control company. After watching him lying in bed while life slowly
left his body, my head began spinning like a top. To say I could not think straight was
an understatement.

With two such life-changing events within a week, you probably would guess that
I would not be trading or taking up any other type of mental and emotional task.
But you'd be wrong, I was still trading. Looking back on it now, I was completely
crazy to trade. Yet I did. On December 23, about an hour or so before the close, on a
whim I decided that I should buy live cattle futures. I’m sure I had my reasons, but I
am equally sure that those reasons were contrived by my mind in order to justify the
trade. I wasn’t in my right mind at all. I had no business trading.

I’m sure you know how this story ends. After the close on December 23, the U.S.
Department of Agriculture announced that a case of mad cow disease was found in
the United States. The impact on the market would be terribly negative. Since I was
long cattle futures, and the market was certainly headed for a free fall, my account
was in for a slow death, temporarily slowed only by the daily limits in the futures
markets. I could only lose $600 per day per contract, at least until the exchange ex-

. alt ___Mad cow disease
ii ~~ announced after the

natty close

ult

Nh

Created win Trasestabon. TradeStation Techaloges ne. Alighs reserved.

FIGURE 0.1 Mad Cow Disease Causes Live Cattle Futures to Collapse
\n\n=== PAGE 17 ===\n3
INTRODUCTION
panded the daily downside limit. For my account size, having a “locked limit” down 
even with one contract was extremely painful. 
 A week later, after three days of a locked limit down market—where I could not 
exit at any price—I was fi nally able to liquidate, with a $5,400 loss. 
 This was about seven times the maximum loss I had expected, and as a percentage 
of my account, it was brutal. Not the end of the world, but it really made me wonder. 
Was the past month just the start of a prolonged losing streak, both in trading and in 
life? What was I doing trading anyhow, after all the recent emotional hits to my psyche? 
And trading on a whim, a hunch? When was I going to stop such destructive behavior? 
Could I stop such destructive behavior and fi nally turn into a winning trader? Could 
this series of unfortunate events provide the impetus to rise from the ashes, to turn my 
trading around? So many questions—ones I had no answer for. 
 As it turns out, as bad as this trade was, mad cow disease probably saved my trad-
ing life. This book documents that trading story, warts and all. Along the way, I got
better and better at developing mechanical trading systems, and later in the book I
show you the process I use to develop winning algorithmic trading systems. 
 
■Who Can Beneﬁ t from This Book?
 Regardless of the type of trader you are, or your experience level with trading, I 
think you’ll fi nd something in this book that resonates for you.
 For beginner traders, I hope this book is an eye‐opener for you. I can’t, and I 
won’t, fi ll your head with thoughts of trading profi ts raining down from the sky. 
Anyone who tells you trading is easy is fl at‐out lying to you. Sure, you can make 
lots of money trading, but you also need to be prepared for a lot of losing, a lot of 
drawdowns, and a lot of risk. Whenever someone tells me trading is a piece of cake, 
I always suspect that they are half‐baked. My story, as painful as it is at times, is a 
realistic journey for many retail traders. Of course, as I tell all beginners, read what 
I have written, but then read books by other traders, too. Keep an open mind to 
everything. After a lot of reading, you’ll be able to make solid judgment calls on what 
is correct, what is BS, and what you like and don’t like. The amount of misinforma-
tion about trading is staggering, so all beginners must be wary.
 For intermediate or slightly experienced but struggling traders, maybe your 
failures up until this point aren’t a result of psychology or confi dence. Many 
trading books nowadays put a lot of emphasis on the mental aspect, but all the 
mental preparation in the world won’t help you if you are developing strategies 
incorrectly. If you’ve ever lost money after you started trading a strategy right 
after optimizing it, then you probably realize you were doing something wrong. 
The process detailed in this book should be right up your alley, since it will steer 
you in the right direction.
\n\n=== PAGE 18 ===\n4
INTRODUCTION
 For expert traders, most of what I present here you’ll have already seen before in 
some fashion. Certainly, there are many great trading books that discuss many of the 
issues and problems that I address here. But there is always something new to learn, a
diff erent approach to try, and a diff erent way to think. You probably fi nd many items
in this book that are diff erent from your current method, and you’ll likely benefi t 
from incorporating these new ideas in your trading. 
 Although the book is designed around algorithmic or mechanical trading, which 
is what I primarily do, discretionary traders can benefi t from the concepts detailed 
in this book. Maybe there are parts of your discretionary approach that can be sta-
tistically tested. For example, let’s say your discretionary entry consists of a moving 
average crossover, combined with your intuition. It might be impossible to test your 
intuition, but a moving average crossover can be walk‐forward tested and gently 
optimized. Or perhaps you want to evaluate breakeven or moving stops for your 
exit. There are many wrong ways to test this, but only a few correct ways. You’ll
learn a correct way in this book. Therefore, utilizing the concepts in this book, you
can improve your discretionary approach a great deal, all because you’ll know how 
to properly design and test a trading system. Whether it is a 100 percent mechanical
strategy, or a part mechanical and part discretionary system, putting actual perfor-
mance numbers to entries and exits can only give you confi dence and make for a 
better trading approach. 
 I have organized Building Winning Algorithmic Trading Systems into seven parts. In all 
seven sections of the book, you’ll see me use certain terms interchangeably:
Strategy or trading system —the approach used to trade. This can be rigid rules,
general guidelines and principles, or fl at‐out random guessing. The net result is 
your strategy or trading system. 
Mechanical or rule‐based trading or algorithmic trading —a style of trading in which all 
the rules are defi ned 100 percent. There is no discretion involved, no decisions 
to be made by the trader. 
Hybrid or mixed trading system —a style of trading that includes aspects of algorith-
mic trading, along with discretionary trading. An example would be a mechani-
cal system that gives entry and exit signals, but gives the trader the option to
accept or reject the signal. 
 In Part I, I walk you through my trading history. I think my early ups and downs—
mostly downs—are pretty typical of new or beginning traders. I paid “tuition” 
to the market for many years. But I was able to persevere, winning the World Cup 
Championship of Futures Trading® in 2006, and fi nishing second in 2005 and 2007.
After those successes, I reached the point all part‐time, hobby shop, retail traders 
dream of: I was able to leave a promising career and live the dream of trading full time. 
 In the second part of this book, I tell you how I currently do things. From evaluat-
ing trading systems to designing new trading systems, I lay out my process. It is not 
\n\n=== PAGE 19 ===\n5
INTRODUCTION
perfect, and it is ever evolving, but it contains crucial information that I wish I had 
when I started out. Even if you just follow bits and pieces of what I do, you should
be able to save thousands in market tuition. 
 In Parts III‐VII, I build a trading system, from concept to live trading. It is a good 
trading system, but by no means the Holy Grail (which, by the way, does not exist). I
also discuss in this section what I think is the closest one can get to the Holy Grail—
diversifi cation. Finally, I discuss how I monitor my strategies in real time, with a
real‐time diary of my trading progress through a number of months. 
 I hope that by reading my story, you’ll be able to avoid my mistakes and learn from 
them. Trust me because, as you’ll see, I’ve made a ton of them.
\n\n=== PAGE 20 ===\n\n\n=== PAGE 21 ===\n PA R T  I 
 A Trader’s
Journey 
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 21 ===\nean

A TRADER’S
JOURNEY
\n\n=== PAGE 22 ===\n\n\n=== PAGE 23 ===\n9
 I
t was 1989, and I was California dreamin’. Actually I wasn’t dreaming, I was al-
ready in California, living a young single man’s dream. A year or so out of college, 
I was residing in sunny Manhattan Beach, California, with a small apartment three 
blocks from the soft white sand so wonderful that they used it to help create Waikiki 
Beach in Hawaii. I had graduated the year before, summa cum laude, with a bach-
elor’s degree in aerospace engineering from the University of Michigan, a top‐tier 
engineering school. Then I had turned my back on Massachusetts Institute of Tech-
nology (MIT), California Institute of Technology (Cal Tech), Stanford University, 
Purdue University, and Michigan, all of whom had accepted me in their aerospace 
master’s degree program. I turned down those great schools to live and work in 
sunny California, a lifelong dream. 
 I still remember the precise moment I made that fateful decision. On a bitterly 
cold winter’s day in Ann Arbor, Michigan, I was walking down South University 
Avenue to one of my fi nal‐semester classes. The wind was blowing so hard in my face 
that I actually leaned into the wind to see if it would keep me up. At that point, fall-
ing face‐fi rst onto the ice‐covered sidewalk would not have been much worse than 
feeling the stinging wind in my face. What seemed like a gale‐force wind kept me 
upright, and then I knew—I did not want, or need, to live where it was cold in the 
winter when aerospace engineering graduates like me were fl ocking to jobs in sunny 
southern California. My mind was made up. Sun and sand it was.
 A few weeks after graduation, I packed up my belongings, and with my sister 
Karen as my driving companion, drove cross‐country to warm and sunny Los 
Angeles.
 C H A P T E R   1  
 The Birth of
a Trader
\n\n=== PAGE 24 ===\n10
THE BIRTH OF A TRADER
 One year later, I was settled in. I had a close group of friends, most of them 
Midwestern transplants like me. We’d while away the weekends playing beach
volleyball, usually capping the day off  with a few drinks at a local pub. I loved beach 
living and all the entertainment it provided. Driving around the beach cities in my
little red T‐roof sports car, life was pretty good. 
 But something was missing. 
 I couldn’t put my fi nger on it, but I knew this wasn’t the life for me. Well, beach 
life certainly agreed with me, but my choice of career was the wrong one. Sure, 
designing future fi ghter airplanes and working on secret government projects was 
fulfi lling to a degree. But I just didn’t feel like it was my future. I could not see my-
self doing that kind of work for even 5 years, much less a career of 30 or 40 years. I
needed a jolt to wake me up. That jolt came in the form of junk mail that appeared
in my mailbox one day, and it changed everything. 
 The junk mail booklet was from Ken Roberts, a futures and commodities trader. 
Or at least that is how he presented himself. Looking back on it, he was defi nitely 
more of a salesman than a trader. With a nice, folksy smile and a cowboy hat, Ken laid
out the riches that awaited anyone brave enough to trade futures, or commodities, as 
they were more commonly referred to back then.
 He had a compelling story in that little booklet of his, and I’ll admit I was quickly 
hooked. Looking at a chart of sugar, as shown in Figure  1.1 , seeing all the potential 
profi t just waiting for me, how could I not be? 
 At that point, words like drawdown, risk of ruin, and emotional control were not in my
l
vocabulary. But  massive profi ts, easy money, and  simple trading suddenly were! And with
a money‐back guarantee, how could I go wrong? It was a risk‐free entry pass into a 
world of unlimited profi t potential—or so my naive self‐thought. So I sent a check 
and dreamed that night about all the riches that would soon be fl owing my way. 
 A few weeks later, I received the full trading course. It was a hefty manual, full of 
charts with profi table examples. Initially, I was duly impressed. But then I started to 
 FIGURE 1.1
 Sugar Skyrocketing = Unlimited Profi ts? 
46-point rise in sugar
in 5 months =
$51,520 profit per
contract
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 24 ===\n3

THE BIRTH OF A TRADER

One year later, I was settled in. I had a close group of friends, most of them
Midwestern transplants like me. We'd while away the weekends playing beach
volleyball, usually capping the day off with a few drinks at a local pub. [ loved beach
living and all the entertainment it provided. Driving around the beach cities in my
little red T-roof sports car, life was pretty good.

But something was missing,

I couldn’t put my finger on it, but I knew this wasn’t the life for me. Well, beach
life certainly agreed with me, but my choice of career was the wrong one. Sure,
designing future fighter airplanes and working on secret government projects was
fulfilling to a degree. But I just didn’t feel like it was my future. I could not see my-
self doing that kind of work for even 5 years, much less a career of 30 or 40 years. I
needed a jolt to wake me up. That jolt came in the form of junk mail that appeared
in my mailbox one day, and it changed everything

The junk mail booklet was from Ken Roberts, a futures and commodities trader.
Or at least that is how he presented himself. Looking back on it, he was definitely
more of a salesman than a trader. With a nice, folksy smile and a cowboy hat, Ken laid
out the riches that awaited anyone brave enough to trade futures, or commodities, as
they were more commonly referred to back then.

He had a compelling story in that little booklet of his, and I’ll admit I was quickly
hooked. Looking at a chart of sugar, as shown in Figure 1.1, seeing all the potential
profit just waiting for me, how could I not be?

At that point, words like drawdown, risk of ruin, and emotional control were not in my
vocabulary, But massive profits, easy money, and simple trading suddenly were! And with
a money-back guarantee, how could I go wrong? It was a risk-free entry pass into a
world of unlimited profit potential—or so my naive self-thought. So I sent a check
and dreamed that night about all the riches that would soon be flowing my way.

A few weeks later, I received the full trading course. It was a hefty manual, full of
charts with profitable examples. Initially, I was duly impressed. But then I started to

46-point rise in sugar .
in 5 months =

$51,520 profit per Lj ' =,
contract a”

amen
Saal

a a a a a a a a a: eS}
Created wi TradeStation TradeStation Tecmnologes, ne, A ght reserved

FIGURE 1.1 Sugar Skyrocketing = Unlimited Profits?
\n\n=== PAGE 25 ===\n11
THE BIRTH OF A TRADER
look a little closer at the details. Turns out the whole course was primarily based on 
the 1‐2‐3 head and shoulders pattern. As most traders and investors know, this pat-
tern is a classic chart pattern, as shown in Figure  1.2 . It is easy to fi nd on just about
any chart you look at—you can fi nd a profi table example or two on most any chart, 
any instrument, and any time frame. 
 The problem is that the head and shoulders pattern gives a lot of false signals and 
usually looks good only in hindsight. Of course, I did not know that at fi rst. I only 
knew I could look at a chart, pick out the head and shoulders pattern, and see how
well it worked. 
 I eventually found out I was missing two key pieces of the puzzle. First, when you 
look at a chart with a head and shoulders or any other pattern in it, it is easy to see
the winning trades because you are looking at both the pattern and the outcome of 
that pattern. If you try hiding the outcome of a pattern, it becomes much more dif-
fi cult to fi nd the good patterns.
 The second key I was missing is that the existence of a pattern, by itself, doesn’t 
necessarily mean a trade should be taken. If you take every single head and shoulders 
trade you see, you will soon be broke, as shown in Figure  1.3 . Of course, the naive
wannabe trader in me was oblivious to this fact.
 After a month of dutifully following and paper trading all the head and shoulders 
signals, and fi nding most of them to be unprofi table, I sent all my trading records, along 
with the manual, back for a refund. True to his word, Mr. Roberts refunded my money. 
 My dream of trading riches was shattered, at least temporarily. On the bright side, 
I now saw futures as the way to go—I just realized head and shoulders patterns were 
not going to be the way. Once I abandoned the get‐rich‐quick idea with the 1‐2‐3
head and shoulders patterns, I did what many scientifi c, numbers‐oriented people
do: I looked to mathematical formulas to help me in my decision making. And I
started where many people do: moving averages. 
 FIGURE 1.2
 Good Head and Shoulders Pattern or Just a False Signal? 
Shoulder
Shoulder
Signal to sell
short
Head
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 25 ===\nah ii Shoulder

| 5
ven a

Created wih TradeStation. ©Tredestaton Technologies, Ine. Al ights reserved.

FIGURE 1.2 Good Head and Shoulders Pattern or Just a False Signal?

look a little closer at the details. Turns out the whole course was primarily based on
the 1-2-3 head and shoulders pattern. As most traders and investors know, this pat-
tern is a classic chart pattern, as shown in Figure 1.2. It is easy to find on just about
any chart you look at—you can find a profitable example or two on most any chart,
any instrument, and any time frame.

The problem is that the head and shoulders pattern gives a lot of false signals and
usually looks good only in hindsight. Of course, I did not know that at first. I only
knew I could look at a chart, pick out the head and shoulders pattern, and see how
well it worked.

T eventually found out I was missing two key pieces of the puzzle. First, when you
look at a chart with a head and shoulders or any other pattern in it, it is easy to see
the winning trades because you are looking at both the pattern and the outcome of
that pattern. If you try hiding the outcome of a pattern, it becomes much more dif-
ficult to find the good patterns.

The second key I was missing is that the existence of a pattern, by itself, doesn’t
necessarily mean a trade should be taken. If you take every single head and shoulders
trade you see, you will soon be broke, as shown in Figure 1.3, Of course, the naive
wannabe trader in me was oblivious to this fact.

After a month of dutifully following and paper trading all the head and shoulders
signals, and finding most of them to be unprofitable, I sent all my trading records, along
with the manual, back for a refund. True to his word, Mr. Roberts refunded my money.

My dream of trading riches was shattered, at least temporarily. On the bright side,
Tnow saw futures as the way to go—I just realized head and shoulders patterns were
not going to be the way. Once I abandoned the get-rich-quick idea with the 1-2-3
head and shoulders patterns, I did what many scientific, numbers-oriented people
do: I looked to mathematical formulas to help me in my decision making And I
started where many people do: moving averages.

V dO HIMIG FHL

=
&
5
\n\n=== PAGE 26 ===\n12
THE BIRTH OF A TRADER
 
■ My Moving Average Debacle 
 I’m sure every trader or investor has seen or used moving averages at some point 
in their trading career. Moving averages are a great way to see the general market 
direction, simplifying sometimes chaotic price action. But it comes at a price—lag. 
Moving averages will always lag whatever their calculation is based on, which can be 
a major problem. 
 There are many ways to trade with moving averages. In the simplest method, you 
simply buy when the price is above the moving average, and sell (or sell short) when 
price is below the moving average. This scheme works very well during prolonged 
trends, but gets absolutely hammered during trading range price action (see Figure  1.4 ). 
 Early market technician pioneers rectifi ed this by employing two, or even three, 
moving averages. By using more moving averages, the idea was to fi lter out some of 
the trading range whipsaw trades, and leave the long‐term, profi table trend trades.
 FIGURE 1.3  Many Head and Shoulders Look Good but Eventually Fail 
Head and
shoulders failed
Shoulder
Shoulder
Signal to sell
short
Head
 FIGURE 1.4
Great in Trends, Moving Averages Fail in Trading Ranges
Dual moving average
crossover system prone to
whipsaw losses
Dual moving average
works great in trends
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 26 ===\nTHE BIRTH OFA TRADER | =

NR

[CHOT =r Da ON BOTAN ACT2OT GW O>TI00 8 HetDO) Lamia? 26
Head and

shoulders failed fi “th
ae uf ih!
Head =a
Shoulder ion “ahs
a?

‘Signal to sell
short

I
Mia vom

rv] io oo Oe cs De w By te
Created with TradeStation. ©TradeStaton Technologies, Inc. AM nights reserved.

FIGURE 1.3 Many Head and Shoulders Look Good but Eventually Fail

=| My Moving Average Debacle

I’m sure every trader or investor has seen or used moving averages at some point
in their trading career. Moving averages are a great way to see the general market
direction, simplifying sometimes chaotic price action. But it comes at a price—lag.
Moving averages will always lag whatever their calculation is based on, which can be
a major problem.

There are many ways to trade with moving averages. In the simplest method, you
simply buy when the price is above the moving average, and sell (or sell short) when
price is below the moving average. This scheme works very well during prolonged
trends, but gets absolutely hammered during trading range price action (see Figure 1.4).

Early market technician pioneers rectified this by employing two, or even three,
moving averages. By using more moving averages, the idea was to filter out some of
the trading range whipsaw trades, and leave the long-term, profitable trend trades.

ESO Oa GME =O TG0 OWN HINT ACTTETSN On SU WOTTON

\_ Dual moving average
Dual moving average WOKS great in trends
———_ crossover system prone to

whipsaw losses

* % @iye 0 = 8 om 0 7 mw
Created mth TradeStebon. TradeStation Techmsloges, Ie. Al ogh’s reserved

FIGURE 1.4 Great in Trends, Moving Averages Fail in Trading Ranges
\n\n=== PAGE 27 ===\n13
THE BIRTH OF A TRADER
 After my unsuccessful foray into futures with chart patterns, I was struck by the 
apparent awesomeness and simplicity of the triple moving average. Looking at a
chart, it was easy to see the profi table trades, while the unprofi table whipsaw trades 
were much harder to detect (see Figure  1.5 ). During the whipsaw periods, the mov-
ing average lines were very close together, and seeing crosses of lines was exceedingly 
diffi  cult. Obviously, I had learned little from my head and shoulders experience,
where what I saw on the chart was deceiving me. 
 I quickly became a convert to the whole moving average concept, and after a few 
quick successful tests (I did not understand the need for testing over hundreds of 
trades at this point, so 10 or 20 trades, computed by hand, were good enough for
me!), I decided to fund my fi rst account. Even though I had recently purchased a
condo in expensive southern California, which took most of my savings, I was able to 
scrape together $5,000 to open an account. Naturally, I was nervous beyond belief.
This was my nest egg, at the mercy of moving averages. In retrospect, the insanity of 
this is obvious, but at the time profi ts were all I could see.
 I decided that my triple moving average system would work perfectly with live 
hogs, as the contract was called back then. I don’t recall if this was the result of test-
ing, where hogs looked the best, or if it was based on margin requirements, with
hogs requiring relatively small margin. I suspect the latter. I liked the lower volatility
of hogs, too, especially when compared to other agricultural products like soybeans
and pork bellies. 
 With my trusty calculator, the daily newspaper, and a sheet of paper with fi ve 
columns on it, every morning before work I’d record the date, closing price, and
calculate the 4‐, 9‐, and 13‐day moving averages. Then, once I got to work, I’d call
my broker and place any necessary trades.
 The fi rst few days and weeks of my fi rst trading system went fairly well. I lost 
more than I made, and I learned fi rsthand about slippage, broker’s errors, and the
 FIGURE 1.5  Triple Moving Average Crossovers Can Be Deceiving 
Trade locations are
hard to see with
many moving
average crossovers
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 27 ===\npa a
ais Me rose wf

many moving
Md average crossovers

Crested wih TradeStston, TradeStation Technoogis, lnc. Al ights reserved

FIGURE 1.5 Triple Moving Average Crossovers Can Be Deceiving

After my unsuccessful foray into futures with chart patterns, I was struck by the
apparent awesomeness and simplicity of the triple moving average. Looking at a
chart, it was easy to see the profitable trades, while the unprofitable whipsaw trades
were much harder to detect (see Figure 1.5). During the whipsaw periods, the mov-
ing average lines were very close together, and seeing crosses of lines was exceedingly
difficult, Obviously, I had learned little from my head and shoulders experience,
where what I saw on the chart was deceiving me.

I quickly became a convert to the whole moving average concept, and after a few
quick successful tests (I did not understand the need for testing over hundreds of
trades at this point, so 10 or 20 trades, computed by hand, were good enough for
me!), I decided to fund my first account, Even though I had recently purchased a
condo in expensive southern California, which took most of my savings, I was able to
scrape together $5,000 to open an account. Naturally, I was nervous beyond belief.
This was my nest egg, at the mercy of moving averages. In retrospect, the insanity of
this is obvious, but at the time profits were all I could see.

I decided that my triple moving average system would work perfectly with live
hogs, as the contract was called back then. I don’t recall if this was the result of test-
ing, where hogs looked the best, or if it was based on margin requirements, with
hogs requiring relatively small margin. I suspect the latter. I liked the lower volatility
of hogs, too, especially when compared to other agricultural products like soybeans
and pork bellies,

With my trusty calculator, the daily newspaper, and a sheet of paper with five
columns on it, every morning before work I'd record the date, closing price, and
calculate the 4-, 9-, and 13-day moving averages. Then, once I got to work, I'd call
my broker and place any necessary trades.

The first few days and weeks of my first trading system went fairly well. I lost
more than I made, and I learned firsthand about slippage, broker's errors, and the

w

YWACVUL V AO HIG FHL
\n\n=== PAGE 28 ===\n14
THE BIRTH OF A TRADER
general ineffi  ciency of phoning in orders. But I was surviving, which I thought was 
the most important thing. 
 Then disaster struck. I was long hogs, and one morning, I was up $400. I was 
feeling great—this was my ticket to riches! At lunch, I spent a half‐hour trying to
convince my ultra‐conservative and risk‐averse engineering coworker Dave that 
speculating in commodities was easy for a technical‐minded person. Just a few cal-
culations, some simple math (no calculus required), and poof! Money would just add 
up in my account. He wasn’t buying it, and I wondered why. 
 After lunch, I found out why. I checked hog prices right after lunch. I went from 
up $400 to down $800. A $1,200 swing in an hour or so. Twenty‐fi ve percent of my
account vaporized, just like that. I was numb. And I still had the position open since
my system hadn’t given me a close signal yet. 
 A few days later, and a few quick whipsaw losers after the big loss, I totaled the 
damage: $1,500 in losses—30 percent of my account. Never in my wildest dreams 
had I expected that outcome. Panic set in. I stopped trading temporarily. Thank 
goodness I avoided the urge to double or triple my size to avenge my losses (such
misguided dalliances would come later in my trading journey).
 I took the weekend to regroup, and fi gure out my next steps. Clearly, I mistak-
enly thought, after a handful of trades, it was obvious that my triple moving average
system was no good. If that system was terrible, my money‐losing‐addled mind rea-
soned, then the opposite system would be the answer, right? Sort of like the episode 
of  Seinfeld where George Costanza fl ourishes when he begins to do the exact oppo-
d
site of what he has always done before.
 It was a eureka moment for me—if my fi rst system was so bad, then the opposite 
system had to be just as good! Plus, I did not even need to test or evaluate this plan. 
All I had to do was add $1,500 to my initial account balance, instead of subtract it 
(for some reason, commission and slippage losses somehow became money makers 
in my twisted reasoning, but that is another story). Sunday night I went to sleep, in 
my mind thinking I had made $1,500 with my reverse trading system, when in ac-
tuality I had lost $1,500 with the original system. I was excited and happy. Monday 
morning, I was ready to jump in with both feet. 
 Fast‐forward a few weeks, and hogs fi nally hit a great trend. It was a trend that a 
triple moving average system picked up perfectly. If only I were trading the original 
method! Of course, with the “opposite” method, big trends were a killer, and that is 
exactly what the market provided me—a huge losing trade. After that losing trade,
my account was now down $3,000, a 60 percent account loss brought on by the 
triple moving average and reverse triple moving average systems. I had had enough. I 
raised the white fl ag, called it quits for a while, and decided I needed more education.
\n\n=== PAGE 29 ===\n15
 C H A P T E R   2  
 Enough Is Enough 
 B
efore I continue with my saga of losing money trading futures, you might be ask-
ing yourself, “Why was it so tough for this guy? I see ads every day for futures and
forex trading, and it seems like any half‐brained nitwit can make money easily. Why
is this Kevin guy such a loser?” Good question, but let me ask it a diff erent way: “As-
suming trading is that easy—that you can spend fi ve minutes a day entering orders 
on your computer, while relaxing on a white sand Caribbean beach—why isn’t the 
person selling you this miraculous system for $99 doing the same thing? Why is he 
spending his time practically giving away his secrets, instead of just trading his own
ever‐growing mountain of money?” 
 The answer should not surprise you: trading is tough, even for the so‐called gu-
rus, most of whom are not gurus in any sense of the word. I’d estimate that over 
90 percent of the trading systems for sale are junk (and I am being generous here— 
the actual number might be closer to 99 percent), marketed by people who fi gured
out that selling to newbie traders was far easier, and far more lucrative, than actually 
trading. The statistics you hear about 80 or 90 percent of traders losing money is 
no lie, and the reason is that trading is really, really diffi  cult. I hope that by reading 
about my trading journey and later learning about my trading process, you will get 
a sense of how challenging it is. At the same time, you’ll come to realize that success 
in trading is possible but that there aren’t any shortcuts.
 
■ Research 
 After my quick and disastrous initial foray into futures trading, with my subsequent 
60 percent loss in account value, I was scared to trade again. I also realized there was
much I did not know, and that if I wanted to succeed in the trading “wars,” I needed 
\n\n=== PAGE 30 ===\n16
ENOUGH IS ENOUGH
to bring more weaponry than just a simple moving average crossover. So I delved 
into just about any trading book I could fi nd. I read the classics like Reminiscences of a 
Stock Operator (George H. Doran Company, 1923) and 
r
Market Wizards (New York In-
stitute of Finance, 1989), and newer get‐rich‐quick books by authors who probably
never even traded. But regardless of the book, I kept an open mind and just soaked 
it all in. After reading probably at least a dozen books, I was very confused. Here is
some of what I learned: 
 
■ Stop‐losses are a must. Stop‐losses are only for losing traders. 
 
■ Entries are all that matter. Exits are all that matter. 
 
■ Aggressive money management is the key to riches. Aggressive money manage-
ment leads to account failure.
 
■ Trend following is the best way to trade. Trend following is dead.
 I could go on and on, but you get the idea. For every trading “principle” espoused 
in one book, another book would claim the exact opposite was true. Which was 
right? Which was wrong? My head was swimming. But I kept on reading, gather-
ing more information. Eventually, I concluded that all the books were right, and all
the books were wrong. For example, for certain styles of trading, stop‐losses were 
a great idea. But, for other methods, stop‐losses would only stop you from making 
money. A light bulb went on over my head with this concept: there is no one right
way to trade. What is important is to properly evaluate the way I wanted to trade, 
whatever that might entail.
 After this “aha” moment, I went out and bought a database of daily futures prices 
and got myself some programming software. Rather than use an expensive piece of 
trading software (in the early 1990s, trading software was not very popular and it 
was relatively expensive), I decided to create my own back-testing software, using 
Microsoft Excel and Visual Basic. I’ll spare you the details, but suffi  ce it to say that 
I had no trouble developing terrifi c‐looking trading systems. Creating nice‐looking 
equity curves turns out to be a trivial task when you neglect commissions and 
slippage. It is also easy to do when your system has 10 variables and you run 1 million 
iterations with various combinations of those variables. Typical newbie mistakes, and
I was repeating each one of them over and over. The only thing that saved me was 
that the results were so good, and profi ts were so astronomically high, even I did not
believe them. I assumed it was bad data or my software was faulty, but that wasn’t the
root cause. The main problem was that I was testing incorrectly.
 Because I felt my homemade systems were just “too good to be true,” I luckily did 
not put any money into live trading these “Holy Grail” systems. Thank goodness I did 
not. Instead, I decided to abandon my testing and head off  in a diff erent direction. This 
was all because of a book that said I could not lose in trading. Naiveté at its fi nest! 
\n\n=== PAGE 31 ===\n17
ENOUGH IS ENOUGH
 
■ You Can’t Lose—Or Can You? 
 The book that temporarily took me away from methodically testing trading systems 
was You Can’t Lose Trading Commodities (R. F. Wiest, 1988), by Robert Wiest. At the 
time I read it in the early 1990’s, the book was already over fi ve years old, and I 
remember its being prominently displayed in a local bookstore. I assumed this meant 
it must be a legitimate money maker to still be around after fi ve years. This book was 
all about scale trading. The concept is that you fi nd a commodity that is trading near 
a multiyear low, fi nd a fundamental reason for it to go up in the near future, and then 
buy on a scale down and sell with a small profi t. Here’s an example: let’s say wheat 
is currently at a 10‐year low of 300 cents per bushel. You also hear forecasts the 
next wheat crop is going to be much smaller because of bad weather. Your analysis 
indicates that over the next 6 months, wheat is likely to go up. So you buy wheat at 
300 cents, hoping to sell it at 305 cents ($250 profi t per contract). If the price falls to 
290 cents, you buy a second contract, hoping to sell that at 295 cents. You continue 
to add to your position every 10 cents down, with a profi t target 5 cents above the
corresponding entry. Ideally, the price will fall a bit, allowing you to buy three or
more contracts, before it rises to 305, letting you exit with a profi t on each contract.
Then, if the price fell again, you’d just repeat the process, scaling in and scaling out.
 The author claimed something like 90 to 95 percent wins with this method, which 
is entirely possible. But winning percentage is really meaningless. What matters is 
the return on account, and the drawdown. And, when done correctly, scale trading 
produces fairly low rates of return (10 to 20 percent), with fairly high drawdowns 
(20 percent or more). This is because you need a lot of capital to keep buying on the 
way down. If you don’t have enough capital, you won’t be able to continue buying. 
Then you won’t be able to cash in on the lucrative oscillations in price. Eventually, if 
the situation gets dire enough, you’ll be hit with a margin call, and your scale trading
will likely abruptly end. 
 Even with the drawbacks in the approach, scale trading appealed to me on an in-
experienced trader level. All I had to do was fi nd commodities near multiyear lows 
and set up scales to trade them. I knew I would not be satisfi ed with only 10 to 
20 percent return, so I had to make some adjustments, the main one being trading 
with a much smaller than recommended account size. This worked great the fi rst year 
I did it. I ended the year with about 90 percent annual return, all from scale trading. 
 They say early success in any fi eld leads to eventual disaster, and that is what hap-
pened to me with scale trading. After a 90 percent annual return that fi rst year, I con-
cluded I had this trading thing all fi gured out. Losses would be small and infrequent, 
but the cash register would keep ringing as I cashed in scale‐trading winner after 
winner. Of course, the market slapped me around, and slapped me hard, for thinking 
this way. I don’t even recall which commodity was the source of pain—it might have
been wheat, corn, cotton, or coff ee—but one of my second‐year scales went terribly
\n\n=== PAGE 32 ===\n18
ENOUGH IS ENOUGH
bad. I lost all my fi rst year’s profi ts, and most of what was left in my account. For me,
the book title  You Can’t Lose Trading Commodities should have been “When You Ignore 
Simple Directions, You Can Lose a Ton Trading Commodities!” Needless to say, I was
done with scale trading.
 
■ Averaging Down—Adding to Losers
 Although I abandoned the scale‐trading approach, I was intrigued with the idea of 
adding to my position as the price went against me. When this occurred, which was
frequently, I could buy even more at a cheaper price! Then, when I was inevitably 
proven to be correct in my market analysis, I would gain even more profi t. I had al-
ready done the same thing with mutual funds through automatic investments; I’d buy 
more shares as the price fell, getting a better deal on the asset. 
 The whole approach sounded too good to be true, and of course it was. Adding 
to a losing position works with mutual funds because (1) over time, mutual funds 
almost always go up eventually, and (2) mutual funds are not leveraged. With futures
like wheat (my personal favorite for the adding‐to‐losers strategy), the price doesn’t
necessarily have to go up over a 5‐ or 10‐year period. Price could stay depressed for 
a long time, leaving you with a pile of open, losing trades. Plus, for every wheat con-
tract you purchase, you need extra margin, and eventually even small price moves 
become huge swings in your equity. That is what happened to me.
 The year was 1998. For some crazy reason, I was convinced that wheat was due 
for an increase. In mid‐1998, wheat was at a fi ve‐year low (see Figure  2.1 ).
 Based primarily on that fact, along with some cursory fundamental analysis, I decid-
ed that wheat was on its way up to mid‐1996 highs. So I bought wheat. The price went 
down. I bought more wheat. The price went down some more. This went on from May 
to September, and every time I bought another contract, I dug myself deeper in a hole. 
 FIGURE 2.1
 In 1998, Wheat Was at a Five‐Year Low
Wheat at a five-year low
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 32 ===\nENOUGH IS ENOUGH | =

o

bad. I lost all my first year’s profits, and most of what was left in my account. For me,
the book title You Can’t Lose Trading Commodities should have been “When You Ignore
Simple Directions, You Can Lose a'Ton Trading Commodities!” Needless to say, I was
done with scale trading.

= Averaging Down—Adding to Losers

Although I abandoned the scale-trading approach, I was intrigued with the idea of
adding to my position as the price went against me. When this occurred, which was
frequently, I could buy even more at a cheaper price! Then, when I was inevitably
proven to be correct in my market analysis, I would gain even more profit. I had al-
ready done the same thing with mutual funds through automatic investments; I’d buy
more shares as the price fell, getting a better deal on the asset.

The whole approach sounded too good to be true, and of course it was, Adding
to a losing position works with mutual funds because (1) over time, mutual funds
almost always go up eventually, and (2) mutual funds are not leveraged. With futures
like wheat (my personal favorite for the adding-to-losers strategy), the price doesn’t
necessarily have to go up over a 5- or 10-year period. Price could stay depressed for
a long time, leaving you with a pile of open, losing trades. Plus, for every wheat con-
tract you purchase, you need extra margin, and eventually even small price moves
become huge swings in your equity. That is what happened to me.

The year was 1998. For some crazy reason, I was convinced that wheat was due
for an increase. In mid-1998, wheat was at a five-year low (see Figure 2.1).

Based primarily on that fact, along with some cursory fundamental analysis, I decid-
ed that wheat was on its way up to mid-1996 highs. So I bought wheat. The price went
down. I bought more wheat. The price went down some more. This went on from May
to September, and every time I bought another contract, I dug myself deeper in a hole.

Created wih TradeStation. CTradeStaion Technobgies, Ine. Al nghs reserved.

FIGURE 2.1 In 1998, Wheat Was at a Five-Year Low
\n\n=== PAGE 33 ===\n19
ENOUGH IS ENOUGH
 If the price of wheat kept falling, I knew it wouldn’t be long before the margin calls 
would start arriving. Psychologically, I couldn’t accept that, so instead I’d run to the 
bank at lunch once or twice a week, and have $1,000 to $5,000 wired to my trading 
account. Somehow, I thought this was a better option than getting a dreaded margin 
call. I did this so many times—skipping lunch, speeding to the bank, speeding back 
to work—that I had my own personal wire transfer lady at the bank. Her name was 
Cookie, and in those many trips to wire money, I learned a lot about her family, her 
grandkids, and her life. I even gave her little gifts and toys for her grandkids. At this 
point, alarm bells that should have been screeching were silent—wasn’t it strange that 
I thought this constant wiring of money to a drowning trading account was a good idea? 
 Luckily, starting in the beginning of September 1998, the price of wheat began 
to rebound. No more wire transfers! In fact, by mid‐October, I was getting close to
breakeven. I started buying more contracts on the way up, further leveraging myself. 
I was convinced, though, that the low was in, and if that were true, shouldn’t I be 
buying? All told, I was down about $20,000 on the trade now, which was huge con-
sidering my account size. But the price was up, and I was looking to be king. Then 
came October 13, 1998 (see Figure  2.2 ).
 I remember October 13, 1998, for good and bad reasons. I was in Seattle on 
business, and after the market closed, I saw that wheat had gone up 6 points! Plus, 
my hometown baseball team, the Cleveland Indians, were in the American League 
Championship Series against the dreaded New York Yankees. I watched Game 6 from
my hotel room, and in the fi fth inning, Jim Thome of the Indians hit a grand slam. 
Things were looking up, I thought. My Indians are going to win, and wheat is going
up. Somehow, my mind linked the fate of wheat and the Indians together.
 Of course, you can guess how this story ends. The next inning, the Yankees scored 
three runs, and the Indians lost and were therefore eliminated from the postseason. 
Wheat also slowly and surely fell in price, and with the extra contracts I bought
during the previous up leg, even a small correction was a killer. By the beginning of 
 FIGURE 2.2
 My Last Gasp with Averaging Down in Wheat 
Capitulation, exit long trade
I bought heavily, as
price dropped
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 33 ===\nIf the price of wheat kept falling, I knew it wouldn’t be long before the margin calls
would start arriving. Psychologically, I couldn’t accept that, so instead I'd run to the
bank at lunch once or twice a week, and have $1,000 to $5,000 wired to my trading
account. Somehow, I thought this was a better option than getting a dreaded margin
call, I did this so many times—skipping lunch, speeding to the bank, speeding back
to work—that I had my own personal wire transfer lady at the bank. Her name was
Cookie, and in those many trips to wire money, I learned a lot about her family, her
grandkids, and her life. I even gave her little gifts and toys for her grandkids. At this
point, alarm bells that should have been screeching were silent—wasn’t it strange that
I thought this constant wiring of money to a drowning trading account was a good idea?

Luckily, starting in the beginning of September 1998, the price of wheat began
to rebound. No more wire transfers! In fact, by mid-October, I was getting close to
breakeven. I started buying more contracts on the way up, further leveraging myself.
I was convinced, though, that the low was in, and if that were true, shouldn’t I be
buying? All told, I was down about $20,000 on the trade now, which was huge con-
sidering my account size. But the price was up, and I was looking to be king, Then
came October 13, 1998 (see Figure 2.2).

I remember October 13, 1998, for good and bad reasons, I was in Seattle on
business, and after the market closed, I saw that wheat had gone up 6 points! Plus,
my hometown baseball team, the Cleveland Indians, were in the American League
Championship Series against the dreaded NewYork Yankees. I watched Game 6 from
my hotel room, and in the fifth inning, Jim Thome of the Indians hit a grand slam.
Things were looking up, I thought. My Indians are going to win, and wheat is going
up. Somehow, my mind linked the fate of wheat and the Indians together.

Of course, you can guess how this story ends. The next inning, the Yankees scored
three runs, and the Indians lost and were therefore eliminated from the postseason.
Wheat also slowly and surely fell in price, and with the extra contracts I bought
during the previous up leg, even a small correction was a killer. By the beginning of

|__=L bought heavily, as. ae
price dropped

ny hhyis

'
f)

t 0
ey

TAC
iin

Ny |
+
if] i i

Capitulation, exit long trade

¢ 0 8 2 we 0 ow 6 Se 7 wa ra a a
‘Crate win TreStann_OTrdeSiaon Tchnopes, nA his reserved

FIGURE 2.2. My Last Gasp with Averaging Down in Wheat

HDNONA SI HDNONA | ©
\n\n=== PAGE 34 ===\n20
ENOUGH IS ENOUGH
December, I was down about $70,000 on that trade alone and out of funds I could 
wire to my account. Cookie would have to get toys for her grandkids from someone
other than me, because I was done trading. At least for a year or two. 
 
■ The Wild Man Emerges 
 After my averaging down approach miserably failed, I spent the next couple of years 
doing only minor trading, focusing on rebuilding my trading funds. When I had enough 
spare capital, I turned to what I call the “wild man” approach. With this approach, I did 
not need to test or evaluate any idea before trading real money with it. If I got a brilliant 
idea that coff ee should go down, I’d sell it. If OPEC was discussing stricter quotas, I’d 
buy crude oil. No real rhyme or reason to my method—just crazy trading based on 
whatever rumor I heard or whatever thought fl oated into my brain. I tried to keep 
losses small and winners big, but for some reason doing things the other way around 
was psychologically much easier. Plus, I still employed some tricks from my earlier 
trading, such as adding to losers. I’m sure my broker liked me, but my account equity 
did not. My account treaded water with this haphazard approach, but after a while I 
knew there was no future in it. Yet I still followed this approach, if you can call it that, 
until the fateful mad cow trade I discussed earlier. That trade and all the circumstances 
surrounding it were a cold slap in the face. I desperately needed to trade diff erently. 
 
■ Time to Evaluate
 As 2004 started, I was still licking my wounds from the live cattle/mad cow debacle. 
I took a long, hard look at my trading, and I did not like what I saw:
 
■ Moving average crossover system—lost money.
 
■ Reverse moving average crossover system—lost money. 
 
■ Tested thousands of systems—results too good to be true, never traded. 
 
■ Scale trading—lost money. 
 
■ Averaging down—lost money. 
 
■ Wild man approach—lost money.
 Almost no matter what I did, I lost money at it. The deceiving part was that for 
a while many of these methods would work, giving me an extra boost of irrational 
confi dence before the inevitable fall. The extra confi dence really just made the re-
sulting crash tougher, both emotionally and fi nancially.
 Yet when I looked at my history, I saw the one bright spot: I did have success 
developing, but not live trading, mechanical trading algorithms. The problem was 
\n\n=== PAGE 35 ===\n21
ENOUGH IS ENOUGH
that I did not know if it was because I actually had good systems, or if good results
were the result of a fl awed testing process (bad data, overoptimization, bad program-
ming, etc.). I decided in early 2004 that this was my chance to become consistently
profi table—I had to develop and test mechanical algorithms.
 Most of the fi rst half of 2004 was getting things in place—investigating trading 
ideas, looking at software options, determining how to do walk‐forward testing 
manually. For my strategy, I decided to go with a simple X day close breakout; 
that is, if the close today is the highest close of the last X bars, then buy at the 
open of the next bar. For short entries, it was vice versa. For exits, I employed 
a simple stop based on average true range, a fi xed dollar stop, a moving stop as 
profi ts accumulated, and a tightening stop that applied only when a big open profi t 
occurred. It was a pretty simple system, but my initial results showed it worked 
well. Nothing earth shattering about this strategy’s entries or exits—I am sure 
this approach was been applied by many people before. It is just a simple trend‐
following approach, and as long as some sustained trends develop, the system 
overall will make money. 
 Even though up until this point I had used back‐test software I had developed 
myself, I decided that I did not fully trust the results. I obtained a copy of Trade-
Station software, which at the time was probably the best and most popular (many
people say it still is the best, and I still use it as my primary tool, but there are many 
other excellent back‐test programs available on the market today, too). In addition 
to making the testing easier, I had much more faith in the results. The only problem 
was that I wanted to utilize walk‐forward testing (discussed in great detail later), 
and TradeStation at the time did not support that feature. So I was relegated to run-
ning optimizations on TradeStation, then computing results and manually perform-
ing a walk‐forward analysis. It was tedious work, but at the same time it gave me a
solid sense of how walk‐forward testing actually worked (I suggest your fi rst walk‐
forward test be done manually to increase your understanding.) 
 By the last quarter of 2004, I had a system I felt was ready to trade. I stuck my 
toe in the water, making a few trades with the system, and found that the results 
matched the back test pretty well. Full‐size trading of my new system would begin 
in 2005. As 2004 ended, after more than 10 painful years of trying diff erent ap-
proaches, and eventually failing with most, I fi nally saw the proverbial light at the end 
of the tunnel. Thankfully, it wasn’t a train coming at me! I had a tested method that 
worked with real money, and I wanted to shout from the mountaintop, “I am a good 
trader!” Since I live in Ohio, where mountains are a rarity, I did the next best thing: 
I entered a public, worldwide trading contest. Actually, I had entered the contest in 
2004, but I used a pseudo mechanical, mostly discretionary system that did well for
a while, but eventually fell apart. But this time, I’d be armed with a good mechanical 
approach and hopefully not embarrass myself. With that fateful decision, my trading 
adventure continued.
\n\n=== PAGE 36 ===\n\n\n=== PAGE 37 ===\n23
 B
ased on the work I had completed in 2004, I thought I had a viable trading 
strategy. Of course, I wanted to share my “success” with the world but at the 
same time not give away the strategy. So I did the next best thing: I entered a public 
trading contest. 
 For those of you who have never heard of it, the World Cup Championship of 
Futures Trading, sponsored by Robbins Trading Company, is the premier worldwide, 
real money, year‐long futures trading contest. It attracts some of the best and bright-
est traders from around the globe, all matching wits and pitting strategies against 
each other. It is a high‐pressure contest, with results constantly posted for all to see 
(back in the old days, results were published monthly in trading magazines; now they 
are updated daily on the World Cup web site: www.worldcupchampionships.com). 
In 1987, legendary trader Larry Williams turned $10,000 into over $1.1 million in 
that contest. That gives you an idea of the caliber of traders who competed.
 Once I had my mind set on entering the trading contest, I had to make sure my 
system was good enough. Looking at the performance of past winners, I concluded 
that I had a reasonable chance of fi nishing in the top three contestants, as long as I 
had an annual return of 100 percent or higher. That was actually my goal; it wasn’t 
 C H A P T E R   3  
World Cup
Championship of 
p
Futures Trading
p
p
®
Triumph
\n\n=== PAGE 38 ===\n24
WORLD CUP CHAMPIONSHIP OF FUTURES TRADING® TRIUMPH
to win the contest, since I realized that at the upper end of performance, luck 
would play a role. I could not count on luck to win the contest; all I could do was 
set myself up to be near the top. To achieve 100 percent return over the course of 
a year, I knew I had to accept a very large maximum drawdown. I decided I would 
allow around 75 percent maximum drawdown, which would be ridiculous for any 
normal trader’s account. But, as I’ll discuss in great detail later, your goals and 
expectations should be based on the situation at hand. For a trading contest where 
the only success criterion was return on account, allowing a large drawdown makes 
sense. If, however, the contest were based on return and risk (say the winning con-
testant would have the highest Calmar ratio), I would have approached the contest 
completely diff erently. This will be discussed in detail later, but for now realize the 
goals and objectives I set at the outset dictated every subsequent step in the trading 
development process.
 As previously mentioned, I had developed a decent trading strategy in 2004. It 
actually would have been good enough to fi nish in second or third place in the 2004 
contest, but, of course, I wasn’t ready to enter at that point. However, I was ready 
for 2005 with the following system: 
 Entry
 Buy next bar after 48 bar high close (vice versa for short), as long as the 30‐bar 
RSI was greater than 50 (less than 50 for short trades).
 Exit 
 Calculate stop based on: 
 Fixed dollar value ($1,000)
 Y * average true range from entry 
 Z * average true range from entry (profi t target)
 Other Rules (based on my psychology, I felt I needed these) 
 If last trade was a loser, wait 5 bars before entering next trade (minimizes 
whipsaws). 
 If last trade was a winner, wait 20 bars before entering next trade (be patient after 
wins). 
 The system utilized daily bars for all trading signals, which was perfect for some-
one with a full‐time job, like me. Each night, I could simply review my charts, place
any orders for the next day, and then not worry about the intraday variations. It was 
the ideal setup, as my time to check on my positions during the day was limited. 
 For markets to trade, I had a basket of nine futures that I looked at:
 
■ Corn 
 
■ Cotton
\n\n=== PAGE 39 ===\n25
WORLD CUP CHAMPIONSHIP OF FUTURES TRADING® TRIUMPH
 
■ Copper
 
■ Gold 
 
■ Sugar 
 
■ 5‐ or 10‐year Treasury notes
 
■ Coff ee 
 
■ Japanese yen 
 
■ Nikkei Index 
 I selected these for their past performance, their relatively low margin require-
ments, and their general lack of correlation to each other. Looking back on this, 
though, I realize I made two pretty big rookie mistakes. First, when I tested my 
system, I tested over 20 to 25 diff erent instruments. Then, upon seeing the actual 
performance, I simply selected the best performers. In other words, I optimized 
based on market! That is a big no‐no for good strategy development. For my second 
mistake, I did not run any detailed correlation studies when selecting the portfolio. 
Rather, I simply guessed at what I thought the correlation should be (“Corn and 
the Nikkei Index are probably not correlated, so I can trade both.”). At the time, 
this seemed reasonable, but my experience since that time has taught me that cor-
relations sometimes are diff erent than what common sense dictates, and should 
always be examined in a portfolio situation. Even then, it is important to realize 
that even noncorrelated instruments can become correlated during market panics. 
Thankfully, in spite of my rookie development mistakes, my trading approach still 
succeeded.
 Since my capital was limited (I started each year with a $15,000 account), I could 
only trade one contract of each instrument. Occasionally, I had to skip a signal here
and there, if I did not have enough available margin. At all times, I tried to trade as 
“fully loaded” as I could, using up as much purchasing power as I could while still
avoiding margin calls. My plan was to take every signal and follow the system as best 
I could, within the constraints of my available capital. 
 Here is how I performed, and some of my thoughts, in each of the years 2005 
through 2007. 
 
■ 2005 
 My equity chart for 2005 is shown in Figure  3.1 . After the fi rst month of 2005, I was 
slightly down. Huh? I was going to take over the trading world with this strategy, and 
yet I was losing money? It seems like this always happens to me—as soon as I start 
trading a strategy, it starts losing money. I was mentally crushed. I was down only
\n\n=== PAGE 40 ===\n26
WORLD CUP CHAMPIONSHIP OF FUTURES TRADING® TRIUMPH
4 to 5 percent, but still it is always nice to begin the year with a bang. Thankfully, by 
mid‐April things were looking up. I was now up over 30 percent for the year, which 
would translate into a 120 percent return for the year. I was on fi re! Everything was 
working according to plan. 
 Of course, just like any Hollywood movie, the story has to have a dark period. 
For me, that was a four‐month drawdown from mid‐April to mid‐August. Not only 
did it last a long time, but it also was severe—over 40 percent drawdown. At the
lowest point, I had pretty much given up winning the contest or even coming close 
to winning. But I stuck to my plan. I was still trading the system as best I could, but
I had to skip a few trades because of margin concerns. That summer was defi nitely a 
“bummer day ’round here” for my contest account.
 Things started to improve in mid‐June, and although it would take a few months 
to reach a new equity high, by mid‐December I had almost tripled my account. A 
couple of nice trends in Japanese yen and copper in September 2005, and a cof-
fee trend in November really helped the account take off . That is really how trend 
trading works—you can have months of fl at to down performance, but catching a 
couple of trends can make your whole year. The problem, of course, is that if you 
miss the trend trade—let’s say you give up before the trend shows itself because 
of the numerous false breakout losses, or you don’t have enough money in your 
account to take every trading signal—your performance will be dismal. Because 
 FIGURE 3.1
My Equity Chart, 2005 World Cup Contest Account 
2005 Results
Contest position
Second place
Return
Max Drawdown
Return/Drawdown
148%
42%
3.5
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 40 ===\nNv
a

DNSHIP OF FUTURES TRADING® TRIUMPH

WORLD CUP CHAM

50000

2005 Results
$45,000 “| Contest position Second place |
Return 148%
$40,000 Max Drawdown 42% | + : \
Return/Drawdown 35
35,000

:

$28,000

Recount equity

3

$15.00

$10,000

$0
11172005 17312005 3722005 4/172005 5/1/2005 5/31/2005 6:30/2005 7302005 29/2005 9/28/2005 10/28/2005 11/27/2005 1227/2006}
Date

FIGURE 3.1 My Equity Chart, 2005 World Cup Contest Account

4 to 5 percent, but still it is always nice to begin the year with a bang, Thankfully, by
mid-April things were looking up. I was now up over 30 percent for the year, which
would translate into a 120 percent return for the year. I was on fire! Everything was
working according to plan.

Of course, just like any Hollywood movie, the story has to have a dark period.
For me, that was a four-month drawdown from mid-April to mid-August. Not only
did it last a long time, but it also was

severe—over 40 percent drawdown. At the
lowest point, I had pretty much given up winning the contest or even coming close
to winning. But I stuck to my plan. I was still trading the s

‘stem as best I could, but

Thad to skip a few trades because of margin concerns. That summer was definitely a
“bummer day ‘round here” for my contest account.

Things started to improve in mid-June, and although it would take a few months
to reach a new equity high, by mid-December I had almost tripled my account. A
couple of nice trends in Japanese yen and copper in September 2005, and a cof-
fee trend in November really helped the account take off, That is really how trend
trading works—you can have months of flat to down performance, but catching a
couple of trends can make your whole year, The problem, of course,

s that if you

miss the trend trade—let’s say you give up before the trend shows itself because

of the numerous false breakout losses, or you don’t have enough money in your
account to take every trading signal—your performance will be dismal. Because
\n\n=== PAGE 41 ===\n27
WORLD CUP CHAMPIONSHIP OF FUTURES TRADING® TRIUMPH
of this, trend trading is not for everyone, as it can be so psychologically diffi  cult 
to follow.
 When I hit my peak equity in mid‐December 2005, I knew I was in good shape for 
the contest, for either second or third place. First place was out of the question, as 
the contest leader, Ed Twardus, was up over 250 percent for the year. With my con-
fi dence riding high, I did violate my system toward the end of the year, when I added 
on to a losing position in coff ee. At the time, I was aiming for a 200 percent return, 
and apparently old habits die hard, since I was resorting to averaging down once 
again (will I ever learn?). So the last two weeks of December I gave back a chunk of 
equity. Lesson learned again: don’t add to losers!
 
■2006 
 After my success in 2005, I realized that I had a good strategy, and if I traded it cor-
rectly, without emotion, I’d probably do okay in 2006. The problem with a public 
trading contest, of course, is that it is embarrassing when one month you are in the
top three fi nishers, and the next month you are out of the top three. Worse yet is
when you fi nd yourself right behind the lead trader. When that happens, it is very 
enticing to take a few fl yer trades to catch that person. I tried that back in 2004, 
in an ill‐fated attempt to catch eventual winner Kurt Sakaeda. Not that I had any 
chance, by the way: Kurt fi nished the year up 929 percent, a terrifi c performance. 
Yet he always remained very humble about his performance (a great characteristic 
for a trader). 
 As trading in 2006 began, I had high hopes, a solid plan, and a clear head. My 
performance in 2006 is shown in Figure  3.2 . Unlike 2005, the fi rst month of 2006 
was great for me. I was up about 30 percent, and I felt great about my chances. Of 
course, whenever I feel great about my trading, a drawdown is right around the
corner. That happened in February and March and brought me back down to break-
even. A couple of losing trades in yen and 10‐year Treasury notes helped bring me 
back down to earth. 
 But in the midst of this drawdown, in mid‐February, I would enter the trade that 
changed everything for me: I went long copper, as shown in Figure  3.3 . I held that 
one trade (actually two separate trades, after accounting for rollover) from February 
17, 2006, to May 1, 2006, and it produced a net profi t of $28,875 per contract. It
was one of those once‐in‐a‐blue‐moon‐type trades, where the market just takes off , 
with me holding on for the ride. My account value on May 1 was $45,122, so that
meant that one copper trade was responsible for over 95 percent of my profi t for 
the year. 
 At the beginning of May 2006, being up 200 percent already in the contest gave 
me a euphoric feeling. Little did I know that was my peak for the year, and the rest 
\n\n=== PAGE 42 ===\n28
WORLD CUP CHAMPIONSHIP OF FUTURES TRADING® TRIUMPH
of the year would be a slow downhill slide. During the rest of 2006, I still traded
the system as planned, and I still traded only one contract for each trade. I probably
should have traded larger size, since my account had tripled, but part of me was 
scared that I’d give back my profi t. That turned out to be a good decision, since most 
of the next seven months were net losers.
 Toward the end of the contest, I also had to contend with Michael Cook, a 
worthy opponent in second place. Although I knew the guidelines about just 
focusing on your own performance and not worrying about the other traders, I 
 FIGURE 3.2
My First‐Place Equity Chart, 2006 World Cup Contest Account 
2006 Results
Contest position
First place
Return
Max Drawdown
Return/Drawdown
107%
40%
2.7
 FIGURE 3.3  Copper Skyrocketed, and I Was Long
$28,875 profit in 2.5 months
Buy
Sell
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 42 ===\ni

WORLD CUP CHAMPIONSHIP OF FUTURES TRADING” TRIUMPH

550000 7

2006 Results
Contest position _First place

45,000 || Return 107% i
Max Drawdown 40%
Return/Drawdown 27

$40,000 +

8
:

“Account Equity
3
8

$25,000 +

20,00 +

$15.00

$10.00 + H } 3 +
1V1/2008 1312008 37272008 4/1/2008 5/172008 5/31/2008 6072008 79072008 828-2005 9/28/2006 10/2872006 11/27/2008 1227/2008
Date

FIGURE 3.2. My First-Place Equity Chart, 2006 World Cup Contest Account

of the year would be a slow downhill slide. During the rest of 2006, I still traded
the system as planned, and I still traded only one contract for each trade. I probably
should have traded larger size, since my account had tripled, but part of me was
scared that I’d give back my profit. That turned out to be a good decision, since most
of the next seven months were net losers.

Toward the end of the contest, I also had to contend with Michael Cook, a
worthy opponent in second place. Although I knew the guidelines about just
focusing on your own performance and not worrying about the other traders, I

9008 Ao. oer)

Sell jit

of”
i;

$28,875 profit in 2.5 months.

Created wih TradeStation, TradeStation Techmloges, Inc. Alright reserved]

FIGURE 3.3 Copper Skyrocketed, and I Was Long
\n\n=== PAGE 43 ===\n29
WORLD CUP CHAMPIONSHIP OF FUTURES TRADING® TRIUMPH
had heard how good a trader he was, and I was scared of falling behind him—so 
scared, in fact, that I shut my trading down at the start of December. Part of this 
was warranted (just look at the previous six months of poor performance), but 
part of it was because I thought I’d make Michael beat me, instead of me losing 
to him.
 The ironic thing about my ceasing trading in the month of December, to preserve 
my eventual victory, is that that is not how I remember trading the contest years 
later. In my mind, I stuck to the system the whole year and traded per the plan 
up until the last day. I’m sure in public webinars and writings I have said the same 
thing—that I never stopped trading just to stay in fi rst place. Yet that is exactly what 
I did! And that disturbs me now. No, not that I ceased trading, but that I remember a 
diff erent reality. When that happens in trading, it is usually a bad thing. A good trader
will remember things as they actually occurred, not as they fondly, but incorrectly, 
remembered.
 Even with the six‐month drawdown at the end, I was still able to fi nish in fi rst 
place in the contest. I felt validated—all those years of struggle had fi nally paid off . 
Now the question was: could I repeat that performance in 2007?
 
■2007 
 After fi nishing in second place in 2005 and fi rst place in 2006, I somehow felt that 
I had broken through, and now trading would be easier for me. Of course, the 
lesson I learned was that trading is never easy, and it is always a struggle. An enjoy-
able struggle, sure, but a struggle nonetheless. As 2007 began, I began the contest 
with high hopes. Also, I decided to trade two contest accounts (one crashed and 
burned), and try some little modifi cations to my core strategy. After all, I was still 
a bit spooked by the last six months of 2006, wondering how long my original 
system would suff er.
 Unfortunately, just like 2005, I started out in the wrong direction. My 2007 
performance is shown in Figure  3.4 . Losing trades in just about every instrument
plagued my eff orts, and by the end of March I was staring at a 50 percent drawdown.
By mid‐May, due to some nice trades in orange juice and lean hogs (markets I added 
as part of my modifi cations), I was back to breakeven, where I’d remain for the next 
few months.
 In late summer and fall 2007, nice trends developed in Swiss franc and 30‐
year T‐bonds, and I rode them according to my system’s rules. By the end of 
the year, I was up over 100 percent again, which was good enough for second 
place. Michael Cook, the trader I had been watching in my rearview mirror 
the last part of 2006, raced past me in 2007, finishing the year up a whopping 
250 percent. 
\n\n=== PAGE 44 ===\n30
WORLD CUP CHAMPIONSHIP OF FUTURES TRADING® TRIUMPH
 
■ Reﬂ ections on the Contest 
 After fi nishing fi rst or second three years straight in the World Cup of Futures 
Trading Championship, each time with over 100 percent return, I felt pretty good 
about my trading. To me, it did not prove I was a good trader, but rather it rein-
forced for me the importance of setting goals and objectives. Since I had devel-
oped my trading system to give me a chance to win the contest, I now realized 
that without goals and objectives established up front, the contest could just be 
considered gambling. As you will see later in the book, goals and objectives are a 
key part of what I do. 
 After my second‐place fi nish in 2005, I wanted to let my informal mentor, market 
wizard Dr. Van Tharp, know of my success. I felt a bond to Van, as I had taken many
of his home study courses and read most of his books. He was the closest thing to
a mentor I had ever had. I was proud of myself, and I wanted to thank him. He was 
proud of my success, to be sure, but he also said this: 
 “And although Kevin has been trading and learning for 15 years, most people 
[who] win in trading contests are doing some very dangerous things with position 
sizing. So notice your reactions. Are you impressed with the people [who] win 
competitions? Or is your gut reaction to learn more about how to trade eff ectively
in any market—and just stay in the game!” 
 FIGURE 3.4
My Equity Chart, 2007 World Cup Contest Account 
2007 Results
Contest position
Second place
Return
Max Drawdown
Return/Drawdown
112%
50%
2.2
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 44 ===\nw
Ss

RES TRADING® TRIUMPH

=
=
=
is}
=
5
a
Z

e000
2007 Results
Contest position Second place
$95,000 7 Return 112%|
Max Drawdown 50%|
Return/Drawdown 22
s20.00 | ;
E 525,000 }
ic
1S s20.000 +
15,000 4
10.000 + ¥
‘virze07 vav72007 v2re007 w/sr0cr s/12007 31/2007 30/2007 7raQ/2007 e2Q/2007 e2E-007 1028-2007 27-2007 1227/2007
Date

FIGURE 3.4 My Equity Chart, 2007 World Cup Contest Account

| Reflections on the Contest

After finishing first or second three years straight in the World Cup of Futures
Trading Championship, each time with over 100 percent return, I felt pretty good
about my trading. To me, it did not prove I was a good trader, but rather it rein-
nce I had devel-
oped my trading system to give me a chance to win the contest, I now realized

forced for me the importance of setting goals and objective:

that without goals and objectives established up front, the contest could just be
considered gambling. As you will see later in the book, goals and objectives are a
key part of what I do.

After my second-place finish in 2005, I wanted to let my informal mentor, market

wizard Dr. Van Tharp, know of my success. I felt a bond to Van, as I had taken many

of his home study courses and read most of his books. He was the closest thing to
a mentor I had ever had. I was proud of myself, and I wanted to thank him. He was
proud of my success, to be sure, but he also said thi

“And although Kevin has been trading and learning for 15 years

most people
[who] win in trading contests are doing some very dangerous things with position
sizing. So notice your reactions. Are you impressed with the people [who] win
competitions? Or is your gut reaction to learn more about how to trade effectively
in any market—and just stay in the game!”
\n\n=== PAGE 45 ===\n31
WORLD CUP CHAMPIONSHIP OF FUTURES TRADING® TRIUMPH
 It took me a long time to understand what Van meant by this comment, with my 
fi rst reaction being anger (“how could someone not be impressed with my success?”). 
Eventually, though, I realized the wisdom in Van’s words. The impressive thing is 
not winning a contest—luck, recklessness, and a host of other things can infl uence 
the fi nal results. The impressive thing is to trade the contest eff ectively. For me, 
that meant following my system, the one developed specifi cally to average about
100 percent annual return. So don’t be impressed with the performance itself. I’m 
certainly not. What I am impressed with is my discipline in seeing a goal, chasing it, 
and realizing it. That, to me, is the real success. 
\n\n=== PAGE 46 ===\n\n\n=== PAGE 47 ===\n33
 I
t is the dream of every part‐time, retail trader—one who loves all aspects of trading—
to trade for a living, full time. At least that was always my goal, to live the dream. 
Trader Gary Smith wrote a book with just that title:  Live the Dream by Profi tably Day Trad-
ing Stock Futures (Advanced Trading Seminars, 1995). The dream, of course, is whipping 
s
the markets every day with your amazing strategies, taking as much money out of the 
market as you need (Want a new car? Simple—just double the size of your next trade!), 
spending your ample free time playing with your kids or doing volunteer work, or the 
typical stereotypical behavior: lounging on the beach, margarita in your hand, as bikini‐
clad women (or hunky guys, if that is your preference) stroll by on your private island. 
 The problem is that the dream is rarely, if ever, reality. The truth is that trading full 
time, as I tell many people, is in my opinion “the toughest way to make easy money.” 
But that does not mean it cannot be done; it just means it is incredibly diffi  cult. Any-
thing great worth attaining is always diffi  cult, right? 
 After about 15 years of part‐time trading, quite a lot of unsuccessful trading, I had 3 
consecutive years of contest‐winning performances. As 2007 ended, I began to seriously 
consider trading as a full‐time profession. After all, if I could not succeed at it, after all 
I had been through and all I had accomplished, who actually could? So in early 2008, I 
decided to take the plunge, and trade full time for a living. I thought I had it fi gured all out 
when I started trading full time. Boy was I wrong! I jumped into full‐time trading doing 
some things, some things wrong, and many things I’d do diff erently if I had to do it over. 
Making the Leap—
Transitioning to
g
Full Time 
 C H A P T E R   4  
\n\n=== PAGE 48 ===\n34
MAKING THE LEAP—TRANSITIONING TO FULL TIME
 
■ Conﬁ dence 
 Even though you need many things to succeed at trading (capital, strategies, computers, 
etc.), self‐confi dence will infl uence your long‐term success in full‐time trading more 
than most other things. It took me a long time to fi gure out that most of my trading 
success and failure wasn’t due to having the fastest computer or having the Holy Grail 
of strategies. Rather, the confi dence in my trading abilities, the confi dence in my 
strategy development, the confi dence in my never failing optimism in the face of harsh 
drawdowns would help me survive as a trader. Obviously, confi dence alone will not 
get you there—regardless of what some trading gurus might say—but at some point, 
you’ll need confi dence to weather a trading storm. Be it a major drawdown, many 
failed strategies, or an inability to develop new approaches, sooner or later confi dence 
in your abilities will be required to get you through the tough times. After three years 
of trading contest–winning success, I felt I had confi dence to succeed. After all, staring 
each day at three trading trophies (Figure  4.1 ) helped me feel like I was invincible. 
 What I Did Right 
 I had enough confi dence to think I could succeed at full‐time trading.
 What I Did Wrong
 I probably had too much confi dence when I began trading for a living. After all, win-
ning a trading contest is nice, but did it really mean I could trade full time? Now, I of 
course realize this. Back then, I equated contest success with full‐time success. That
was a dangerous way of thinking.
 
■ Capital 
 I’m sure you’ve heard the stories of people who started with $1,000 and parlayed 
that into a lucrative full‐time trading career. I’m equally sure that for every one of 
those people, there are probably 999 who started with that amount and failed. After
 FIGURE 4.1
My Contest Trophies 
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 48 ===\nyw
z

MAKING THE LEAP—TRANSITIONING TO FULL TIME

| Confidence

Even though you need many things to succeed at trading (capital, strategies, computers,
etc.), self-confidence will influence your long-term success in full-time trading more
than most other things. It took me a long time to figure out that most of my trading
success and failure wasn’t due to having the fastest computer or having the Holy Grail
of strategies. Rather, the confidence in my trading abilities, the confidence in my
strategy development, the confidence in my never failing optimism in the face of harsh
drawdowns would help me survive as a trader. Obviously, confidence alone will not
get you there—regardless of what some trading gurus might say—but at some point,
you'll need confidence to weather a trading storm. Be it a major drawdown, many
failed strategies, or an inability to develop new approaches, sooner or later confidence
in your abilities will be required to get you through the tough times. After three years
of trading contest—winning success, I felt I had confidence to succeed. After all, staring
each day at three trading trophies (Figure 4.1) helped me feel like I was invincible.

What I Did Right

Thad enough confidence to think I could succeed at full-time trading.

What I Did Wrong

I probably had too much confidence when I began trading for a living. After all, win-
ning a trading contest is nice, but did it really mean I could trade full time? Now, I of
course realize this. Back then, I equated contest success with full-time success. That
was a dangerous way of thinking,

| Capital

I'm sure you've heard the stories of people who started with $1,000 and parlayed
that into a lucrative full-time trading career. I’m equally sure that for every one of
those people, there are probably 999 who started with that amount and failed. After

FIGURE 4.1 My Contest Trophies
\n\n=== PAGE 49 ===\n35
MAKING THE LEAP—TRANSITIONING TO FULL TIME
all, as I’ll demonstrate in a later chapter, being undercapitalized is the easiest road
to ruin, whether or not you have a great trading strategy. Even a breakeven strategy 
will lead to ruin if your bankroll is smaller than your opponent’s. The excellent book 
Chances Are … Adventures in Probability by Michael and Ellen Kaplan (Viking Penguin,
y
2006) describes this very well:
 Let’s imagine some Buddhists opened a casino. Unwilling to take unfair 
advantage of anyone, the management off ers a game at completely 
fair odds: fl ip a coin against the bank and win a dollar on heads, lose a 
dollar on tails. What will happen over time? Will the game go on forever 
or will one player eventually clean out the other? 
 One way to visualize this is to imagine the separate moment when 
the gambler is down to his last dollar. Would you agree that his chance 
of avoiding ruin is exceedingly small? Now increase the amount you 
imagine in his pocket and correspondingly reduce the bank’s capital; at 
what point do you think than gambler’s chance of being ruined equals
the bank’s? Yes: when their capital is equal. Strict calculation confi rms
two grim facts: the game will necessarily end with the ruin of one 
party—and that party will be the one who started with the smaller
capital. So even when life is fair, it isn’t. Your chances in this world are 
proportional to the depth of your pockets—the house wins by virtue 
of being the house. 
 Of course, you might protest, “But I have an edge, therefore I’ll win in the long 
run.”  While that is true, remember your edge is likely small, and it probably will 
not last forever. Over time, it will likely regress to breakeven, and that means your
account size becomes critical. Can you outlast your opponents? 
 What I Did Right
 I started full‐time trading with a low‐six‐fi gure account, although I kept some of 
that out of trading accounts, eff ectively “in reserve.” I felt I was reasonably well
capitalized. 
 What I Did Wrong
 Based on my starting capital, I had to make 50 to 100 percent annual returns just to 
pay living expenses, taxes, and slightly increase my trading account. Wow! Looking 
back on that, I realize I was insane and started with about 10 times less than I should
have. Another full‐time trader friend once told me that every successful trader he 
knew started with $2 to $3 million before embarking on full‐time trading. As crazy
as that amount sounds (I would have scoff ed at it six years ago when I started full 
\n\n=== PAGE 50 ===\n36
MAKING THE LEAP—TRANSITIONING TO FULL TIME
time), I now believe it is reasonable. After all, you want your trading account to grow 
over time, and you want to draw living expenses from it, and at the same time you 
need to survive the inevitable drawdowns. It is nearly impossible to accomplish all 
three on a shoestring‐sized account. 
 
■ Living Expenses
 When I started full-time trading in 2008, I was fortunate enough to have three to 
fi ve years of living expenses saved up. That savings was not part of retirement, and 
was not part of my trading capital. I think those are the key issues to living expenses 
when embarking on full‐time trading. Trading is stressful enough without worrying
about where your next meal or mortgage payment is coming from. You need to feel 
secure that your expenses are covered, even if you hit a drawdown right from the
start (which always seems to be the case for me!). 
 What I Did Right
 Due to years of saving money, and a lucrative change‐of‐ownership agreement I had 
at work, I could easily cover living expenses for quite a while, even with a growing 
family. Knowing that allowed me to focus on my trading 100 percent.
 What I Did Wrong
 Nothing. I think having three to fi ve years of living expenses in reserve was a great 
decision. 
 
■ Family Support 
 I am probably in the minority, but I had (and still have) a loving spouse who was totally 
on board with my dream of trading full time. For us, this meant my giving up an upper 
management position in the aerospace industry, where the sky—no pun intended—
was the limit. But she realized that my heart just was not in giving up my soul to a 
ruthless corporation, that I was destined for better things. My children also support 
my trading, and since they are young, it is really the only “job” they have ever seen me 
do. They understand when it is playtime, and when Dad has to work. It does seem to 
them—and to me, too—that it is a lot of the latter and not enough of the former. 
 What I Did Right
 I married the right person, someone who understood and supported my trading 100 
percent. Now, after six years of full‐time trading, she is still fully committed to my 
journey, and so are my three children.
\n\n=== PAGE 51 ===\n37
MAKING THE LEAP—TRANSITIONING TO FULL TIME
 What I Did Wrong
 I pretty much nailed this right on. I shudder to think how much more diffi  cult full‐
time trading would be without a supportive spouse and family. 
 
■ Home Ofﬁ ce Setup
 To save on expenses, I decided to trade right out of my house, in a dedicated home 
offi  ce. The distractions are many, especially with three young children now running 
around. Sometimes my work gets buried in a pile of crayon drawings, and sometimes 
an overeager child will accidentally close a spreadsheet without saving it fi rst. Plus, 
my oldest even placed a few mini S&P trades on my open trading platform. At least 
his trades made money! Overall, though, I can’t complain, when rush hour traffi  c for
me is merely needing to dodge a few Legos on the stairs.
 What I Did Right
 I created a dedicated offi  ce for my trading business. 
 What I Did Wrong
 I probably should have established fi rmer boundaries, such as no touching Dad’s 
computer. But most of the time, intruding children are no problem. 
 
■ Trading Strategies 
 When I started full‐time trading, I had about three to fi ve strategies I felt comfortable 
going live with. Unfortunately, I did not have any extra strategies waiting in limbo, 
ready for trading when some of my fi rst group of strategies lost their performance edge. 
Back then, I naively thought I could trade the same strategies forever. Now I realize that 
some strategies burn bright, like stars in the sky, for a long time. Others, though, are 
more like shooting stars—you need to stop trading them before they crash to earth. 
 What I Did Right
 I had multiple strategies to trade. Even from the beginning, I knew it was a bad idea 
to rely on just one particular method.
 What I Did Wrong
 If I were starting full-time trading today, I’d make sure for every strategy I took live, I 
had at least one good strategy ready to take its place. Plus, I’d make sure I had a long 
list of potential strategies to test and evaluate. 
\n\n=== PAGE 52 ===\n38
MAKING THE LEAP—TRANSITIONING TO FULL TIME
 
■ Brokers
 Just like any other aspect of trading (computers, Internet connections, strategies, 
etc.), it is crucial that you have a backup for your broker. I don’t mean having a
backup phone number for the trade desk (which you defi nitely should have handy,
by the way). I mean having multiple accounts at multiple brokers, ideally having dif-
ferent clearing fi rms. Brokers do fail from time to time (I was a victim of Refco’s 
bankruptcy and of PFG Best’s corrupt owner), and by having multiple accounts, you 
can still trade even if one broker goes down. Since I trade multiple strategies, it also
makes bookkeeping a bit easier, since many times I’ll dedicate one strategy to one
specifi c account. 
 What I Did Right
 I had multiple brokers, which used multiple clearing fi rms. So I think I was pretty 
smart in this regard. 
 What I Did Wrong
 I’ve experienced two broker failures over the past 15 years, and some warning signs 
were evident with each of them—warning signs I missed or ignored. I assumed the 
system would make me whole, and that indeed happened in the Refco case. But I 
am still waiting for most of my money from the PFG Best case. That really irks me,
which you can see fi rsthand by seeing my interview on Fox Business Channel (go to 
www.foxbusiness.com and search for “davey” and you’ll see my interview).
 
■ Free Time
 Ahh, the days of working with the evenings free. That was life in the corporate world, 
for the most part. But now, working full time at home, I feel the need to check the 
markets at all times of day and night. Trading ideas pop into my head, and imme-
diately I run downstairs to program and test them. Now most of my waking life is
thinking about, or working on, trading. I have become too one‐dimensional in my 
pursuit of making a living full‐time trading. I think my wife believes that my trading 
computer is actually now part of me, since I seem to be attached to it so much.
 Of course, for many people who leave a job and start trading, the opposite could 
be true. All the free time, with no boss and no rules, lead many would‐be traders to 
a life of laziness. It is sometimes hard to stay motivated and continue developing new 
trading strategies, especially when your trading account is in a drawdown. Motiva-
tion can really be an issue, and while that might not hurt performance today, it can
aff ect performance down the road.
\n\n=== PAGE 53 ===\n39
MAKING THE LEAP—TRANSITIONING TO FULL TIME
 What I Did Right
 I have always been disciplined enough to keep working and never stop trying to im-
prove my trading. 
 What I Did Wrong
 I probably spend too much time working on trading, and I’ll bet many of these extra 
hours are not the least bit productive. A trader, like any other self‐directed worker, 
needs balance. I need to work on that. 
 
■ Taking the Plunge
 Once I had all the foregoing items in place, at least to a point that I thought was ac-
ceptable at the time, I was ready to take the plunge. I took that full‐time plunge in 
May 2008, and I haven’t looked back since. Has it been easy? No way! Has it been 
fun? Defi nitely! Would I do it again if I had the chance? Of course, although I’d natu-
rally be smarter the second time around. The main point here is that I had a goal,
thought through all the details of it, and eventually took the gamble. If I—someone 
with no trading knowledge until I started reading some books and then trading—can 
do it, I think most people can. If your heart is in it, as mine always has been, the road
to trading success is much easier. If you fi nd all the talk of developing strategies to be
burdensome, my suggestion to you is: walk away—trading probably is not for you.
 As I look at my trading day, years after going full time, I fi nd that most of my trad-
ing activity is not in placing trades or examining account statements. Rather, most of 
my day‐to‐day routine consists of developing strategies, looking for ideas, thinking 
about trading, and, of course, testing and evaluating potential strategies. Most of 
the rest of this book focuses on just that—how I evaluate, design, and test trading 
strategies. 
\n\n=== PAGE 54 ===\n\n\n=== PAGE 55 ===\n Your Trading
System 
 PA R T  I I 
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 55 ===\npranris

YourR TRADING
SYSTEM
\n\n=== PAGE 56 ===\n\n\n=== PAGE 57 ===\n43
 I
f you are going to design trading systems, it is critical that you know how to evalu-
ate the performance metrics of a trading system. This is not always as easy as it 
sounds. To show you what I mean, take a look at Figure  5.1 . This equity curve is for 
a futures trading system, typical of what you might produce if you tested strategies 
yourself, or one you might fi nd publicly available on the Internet. This curve was 
produced with TradeStation software, but results from other popular programs, such 
as MultiCharts and NinjaTrader, are basically the same. All good trading software 
gives you a variety of important (and, in my opinion, many unimportant) metrics 
to review and examine. Most of the time, the equity curve and performance report 
bring up more questions than they answer. Are the results good or bad? Are the re-
sults believable? Do the results have any predictive value? Finally, how do you sepa-
rate the wheat from the chaff ? I’ll answer these questions and more in this chapter. 
 The fi rst point to realize and understand when looking at performance reports, 
equity curves, or trade data is the old adage “if it is too good to be true, it probably 
is.” As a general rule, future performance of a trading system is almost never as good 
as its historical performance. In fact, the better a trading system tests historically, 
the less likely it is to perform that well in the future. Of course, there are exceptions 
to this rule, and after developing trading strategies for a while, these exceptions 
become easier to fi nd. 
 C H A P T E R   5  
Testing and
Evaluating a
g
Trading System
g
\n\n=== PAGE 58 ===\n44
TESTING AND EVALUATING A TRADING SYSTEM
 Why do historical test results usually look better than future results? Some of it 
has to do with survivorship bias, meaning only the good historical trading systems are 
typically shown. Why would a vendor sell a system with poor historical performance? 
Why would you trade a poor system that you created yourself? The simple answer 
is that in both cases the bad results would be discarded, leaving only the remaining 
good results. 
 It is also possible that the historical test results are indeed valid and that the system 
developer has uncovered a true edge in the market. Over time, though, this edge 
may disappear, either due to others fi nding it, market changes, or a host of diff erent 
reasons. The trading system will then revert to the mean, which would be a break-
even strategy before commissions and trading costs.
 Historical test results also can look better than future results due to the method 
of the historical testing. Most people test and evaluate systems incorrectly. Later in 
the book, you’ll learn one correct way to test and evaluate systems, but for now just
realize that the standard accepted way of testing is wrong. This faulty testing leads to 
overoptimistic results and trading systems that are sure to disappoint the end user. 
Of course, experienced traders know how to test systems. The question is: when
looking at historical results, how do you know what to believe? 
 Figure  5.2 depicts what I call a “BS” meter for performance results. It gives you an 
idea of who, if anyone, you can trust with providing you trading results.
 At the very top of the scale—the group with the most BS to sling—are trading 
system vendors. I put this group at the top, even though I have been part of this 
 FIGURE 5.1
Trading System Results—Is This Believable? 
–10000
0
10000
20000
Equity($)
30000
Equity Curve Line - @ES 5 min(06/02/09 16:35 – 06/09/09 11:20)
Legend
Trades
Peaks
Created with TradeStation. ©TradeStation Technologies, Inc. All rights reserved.
100
200
300
Trade Number
400
500
600
700
800
900
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 58 ===\nRADING SYSTEM |

<

TESTING AND EVALUATIN

Equity Curve Line - @ES 5 min(06/02/09 16:35 — 06/09/09 11:20)
30000

20000

Legend

— Trades

© Peaks

—10000

100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900
Trade Number

Created with TradeStation. TradeStation Technologies nc Al rights reserved

FIGURE 5.1 Trading S esults—Is This Believable?

Why do historical test results usually look better than future results? Some of it
has to do with survivorship bias, meaning only the good historical trading systems are
typically shown. Why would a vendor sell a system with poor historical performance?
Why would you trade a poor system that you created yourself? The simple answer
is that in both cases the bad results would be discarded, leaving only the remaining
good results,

It is also possible that the historical test results are indeed valid and that the system
developer has uncovered a true edge in the market. Over time, though, this edge
may disappear, either due to others finding it, market changes, or a host of different
reasons. The trading system will then revert to the mean, which would be a break-
even strategy before commissions and trading costs.

Historical test results also can look better than future results due to the method
of the historical testing. Most people test and evaluate systems incorrectly. Later in
the book, you'll learn one correct way to test and evaluate systems, but for now just
realize that the standard accepted way of testing is wrong. This faulty testing leads to
overoptimistic results and trading systems that are sure to disappoint the end user.
Of course, experienced traders know how to test systems. The question is: when
looking at historical results, how do you know what to believe?

Figure 5.2 depicts what I call a “BS” meter for performance results. It gives you an
idea of who, if anyone, you can trust with providing you trading results.

At the very top of the scale—the group with the most BS to sling—are trading
system vendors. I put this group at the top, even though I have been part of this
\n\n=== PAGE 59 ===\n45
TESTING AND EVALUATING A TRADING SYSTEM
group (although I trade my systems with my own money, unlike most in this group). 
In general, any performance information you receive from someone wanting to sell 
you signals, a black box system, a subscription, trading room, and so on should not
be trusted. An excellent general rule is: don’t believe any of it. 
 This approach is extreme, I realize, but given the probability of a vendor’s selling a 
great trading system, as opposed to a vendor’s selling you a good‐looking but actually 
terrible system, this is sound advice. You will save a lot of money by avoiding anyone
off ering you a fantastic trading system. Anyone off ering a great trading system for 
only a little money just doesn’t pass my “smell” test—the vendor should be trading it
himself, raking in the big bucks, not hawking the system on the Internet for pennies. 
That is why trading system vendors top the BS list. 
 Since trading system vendors typically provide worthless junk, you may be in-
clined to go the “do‐it‐yourself” (DIY) route. For the DIYers out there, there are
dozens of trading platforms that will help you analyze, test, and optimize any type 
of trading system you want to create. On the surface, this seems to be a great way to 
go, relying just on yourself, your ideas, and the trading software. The problem, to be 
discussed in great detail later, is that developing trading systems is not as easy as the 
software vendors would lead you to believe. In fact, new developers following the
approach suggested by the software will inevitably create an overoptimized, curve‐fi t 
trading system. Such a system will produce a great back test, but will almost never
perform well in the real‐time future. So novice DIY developers rank just below trad-
ing system vendors on the BS scale.
 If buying from a vendor is fraught with hazard, and novice DIYers not much bet-
ter, what options are left? If you are convinced that you have to have someone else
provide you with a trading system or signals, using a broker‐supplied system or a 
Commodity Trading Advisor (CTA) system is a much better approach. Let’s take a
quick look at what they off er, and the advantages and disadvantages. 
 FIGURE 5.2  BS Meter for Trading System Results 
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 59 ===\nTrading System Vendors

Increasing Inexperienced Do It
BS Yourselfers

Broker Signals (move down if

you can match hypothetical results)
CTAS ( move down with due diligence)
Experienced Do It Yourselfer

with Solid Development
Process

FIGURE 5.2 BS Meter for Trading System Results

group (although I trade my systems with my own money, unlike most in this group).
In general, any performance information you receive from someone wanting to sell
you signals, a black box system, a subscription, trading room, and so on should not
be trusted. An excellent general rule is: don’t believe any of it.

This approach is extreme, I realize, but given the probability of'a vendor’s selling a
great trading system, as opposed to a vendor’s selling you a good-looking but actually
terrible system, this is sound advice. You will save a lot of money by avoiding anyone
offering you a fantastic trading system. Anyone offering a great trading system for
only a little money just doesn’t pass my “smell” test—the vendor should be trading it
himself, raking in the big bucks, not hawking the system on the Internet for pennies.
That is why trading system vendors top the BS list.

Since trading system vendors typically provide worthless junk, you may be in-
clined to go the “do-it-yourself” (DIY) route. For the DIYers out there, there are
dozens of trading platforms that will help you analyze, test, and optimize any type
of trading system you want to create. On the surface, this seems to be a great way to
go, relying just on yourself, your ideas, and the trading software. The problem, to be
discussed in great detail later, is that developing trading systems is not as easy as the
software vendors would lead you to believe. In fact, new developers following the
approach suggested by the software will inevitably create an overoptimized, curve-fit
trading system. Such a system will produce a great back test, but will almost never
perform well in the real-time future. So novice DIY developers rank just below trad-
ing system vendors on the BS scale.

If buying from a vendor is fraught with hazard, and novice DIYers not much bet-
ter, what options are left? If you are convinced that you have to have someone else
provide you with a trading system or signals, using a broker-supplied system or a
Commodity Trading Advisor (CTA) system is a much better approach. Let’s take a
quick look at what they offer, and the advantages and disadvantages.

=
Ga

SAS DNIGVYL ¥ ONILWNTVAT CNY ONILSTL

\n\n=== PAGE 60 ===\n46
TESTING AND EVALUATING A TRADING SYSTEM
 Many futures brokers now off er what they call “Broker Assist” or “Follow the 
Signals”–type services. Two groups that off er these services are Striker Securities 
(www.striker.com) and World Cup Advisor (www.worldcupadvisor.com). (Full 
disclosure: I have in the past, or plan in the future, to off er signals through these 
two brokers. Based on my personal experience, I believe they are reputable.) For 
a monthly fee, you can “follow” trading signals from a signal provider. The signals 
provider will typically have an account at the broker and will be placing live trades. 
So the results shown are typically actual results, a  huge step above the nonsense most
trading system vendors show as “real.” 
 Of course, just because the results provided by these services are from a traded 
account, it does not mean you will get the same results. Even real results should be 
treated as hypothetical. In fact, my general rule is that unless the results actually hap-
pened in your account, you must treat the results as hypothetical. As you well know, 
hypothetical leaves the door open for a lot of variation in actual results, which you 
should be prepared for. That is one disadvantage of the broker services.
 Another possible disadvantage of a broker‐supplied signal service is that some-
thing can go wrong with either the developer providing the signals to the broker 
or the broker itself. For example, if the developer uses a discretionary approach 
to trade, a personal crisis might throw his/her trading off , and a trading approach 
that was once good now becomes bad. On the broker side, a quick and sudden 
fraud, à la the PFG Best corruption and bankruptcy in 2012, might put your ac-
count at risk. 
 If you choose to follow a CTA, it is reassuring to know that the group is audited 
by regulators and accounting fi rms and that trading results shown are by‐and‐large 
accurate. Of course, some unethical bad apples always slip into the bunch, and they
may produce stellar results for many years, before being destroyed in an explosion 
of fraud and deceit. Bernie Madoff  and his fi rm, while not a CTA, is a good example
of a trusted investment company actually being a complete fraud.
 If you can’t believe trading system vendors, with inexperienced DIY trading 
system developers not being much better, and brokers and CTAs being much bet-
ter but not without risk, what can you do? What is the low group on the BS totem 
pole?
 My opinion is that an experienced DIY trading system developer is the least 
susceptible to BS or otherwise invalid performance reports. I claim this for a few 
reasons. First, an experienced developer knows his trading back‐test software and 
knows all the ways to fool it. He knows to avoid these software limitations, where 
many trading system vendors actively seek out these limitations and use them to
produce their faulty, extremely good‐looking performance reports.
 A second reason an experienced developer, creating his own systems, is lowest on 
the BS scale, is that he is in charge of the process. He can eliminate many potential
issues, such as faulty or missing market data, incorrect forward‐looking rules, and 
\n\n=== PAGE 61 ===\n47
TESTING AND EVALUATING A TRADING SYSTEM
overoptimization and curve fi tting. Being in charge of the complete process is an 
enormous responsibility, but an experienced developer will be quick to fi x issues, 
since he ultimately is solely responsible for his results. 
 Of course, just developing trading systems for many years does not make one an 
expert. The key is to develop systems and then verify the performance in real time. 
Over the course of a few years, a good developer will get better and better at pro-
ducing historical results for trading systems that have a better and better chance of 
holding up in the future. Certainly, when done correctly, an experienced DIY devel-
oper can be pretty low on the BS scale.
 At this point, a few readers are probably asking, “Why even bother testing? All it 
does is prove something worked in the past. It has no bearing on future performance.” 
This is an argument that has some validity, up to a point. It is defi nitely true that “past
performance is not indicative of future results,” which is why the U.S. government 
requires this disclaimer when discussing trading system performance. But does it 
therefore mean that historical testing has no validity? I don’t think so. 
 Here is a case in point. Let’s say you want to build a model of the sun rising. Every 
day for a month, you get up before dawn, and wait for the sun to appear. Every day, 
it rises in the east. So, you build you model, run it for tomorrow, and it “predicts” the
sun will rise in the east. Will it? Who knows for certain? Some strange axis switch-
ing or earth rotation reversing could occur overnight, and the sun could rise in the
north, south, or west. Highly unlikely, yes, but so was the fl ash crash of 2010 or the 
fi nancial crisis of 2008. Outlier and unexpected events can and do happen. 
 If such a calamity occurs, does it mean that the model is useless and never 
should have been built? No, but certainly you’d have to now take into account 
that the world you modeled has changed dramatically. It is the same for trading 
systems. Completely new market conditions could render your trading strategy 
useless tomorrow, or next week or next month, or maybe not at all. But I contend 
that having a model based on history is much better than completely guessing. 
With guessing, you are likely to be looking the wrong way when the sun rises 
tomorrow morning. 
 In evaluating trading systems and their performance report and equity curves, it 
is important to distinguish  how the results were obtained. There are four main ways 
w
to produce results: 
 
■ Historical back testing
 
■ Out‐of‐sample testing 
 
■ Walk‐forward testing
 
■ Real‐time testing
 Each of these is discussed in turn next. 
\n\n=== PAGE 62 ===\n48
TESTING AND EVALUATING A TRADING SYSTEM
 
■ Historical Back Testing 
 Historical back testing is the most common method of testing. It is also the easiest to 
perform, and the easiest to abuse and misuse. The developer simply enters the start 
date and the end date (usually today’s date), includes any parameters to optimize, 
and then lets the strategy engine do all the calculations. The end result will be the 
best set of parameters for that period of time, which can then be used in real live 
trading.
 Unfortunately, there is a major problem when performing a back test in this 
manner. Assuming that the results are not due to overoptimization—too many 
rules, too many parameters, and/or too many parameter values—the historical 
results are by definition going to look great. After all, those results come from 
optimizing! There is virtually no chance that the results in the future will be 
close to the optimized results. The results are just too “tuned” to the data used 
in the test. 
 A great example of this is shown in Figure  5.3 . Looking at just the optimized 
results of a simple trading system, it looks like this is a viable system. But this is be-
cause what you see was optimized. Take any other set of parameters and the system 
will look worse. Going forward, which result do you think is more likely—the one
optimized good result or the many poor results? I hope the answer is crystal clear:
the poor results are a truer refl ection of the actual system performance. The deceiv-
ing part in all this is that sometimes these systems perform well for a time after
 FIGURE 5.3
Optimized Results Frequently Fall Apart after Testing 
After optimization,
results frequently fall
apart
Not optimized
Optimized
0
10000
100
200
300
Trade Number
Created with TradeStation. ©TradeStation Technologies, Inc. All rights reserved.
400
500
Legend
Equity Curve Line - @GC 90 min.(01/02/11 19:30 – 11/12/13 10:30)
Trades
Peaks
–10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
70000
80000
90000
100000
110000
120000
130000
140000
150000
160000
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 62 ===\n| Historical Back Testing

Historical back testing is the most common method of testing. It is also the easiest to
perform, and the easiest to abuse and misuse. The developer simply enters the start
date and the end date (usually today’s date), includes any parameters to optimize,
and then lets the strategy engine do all the calculations. The end result will be the
best set of parameters for that period of time, which can then be used in real live
trading.

Unfortunately, there is a major problem when performing a back test in this
manner. Assuming that the results are not due to overoptimization—too many
rules, too many parameters, and/or too many parameter values—the historical
results are by definition going to look great. After all, those results come from
optimizing! There is virtually no chance that the results in the future will be
close to the optimized results. The results are just too “tuned” to the data used
in the test.

A great example of this is shown in Figure 5.3. Looking at just the optimized
results of a simple trading system, it looks like this is a viable system. But this is be-
cause what you see was optimized. Take any other set of parameters and the system
will look worse, Going forward, which result do you think is more likely—the one

48 optimized good result or the many poor results? I hope the answer is crystal clear:
= the poor results are a truer reflection of the actual system performance. The deceiv-
B ing part in all this is that sometimes these systems perform well for a time after
4 Equity Curve Line - @GC 90 min.(01/02/11 19:30 — 11/12/13 10:30)
a
2 160000 raat
f 150000 | par
< 140000 | c )
g 130000 | } hk
5 120000 | = | LA
5 110000 | feof ya
3 ae
100000 | Any
s | fw | After optimization,
nl 90000‘ { | results frequently fall
2 80000 | re | apart Tagend
a 70000 | f tases
9 + Peaks
g 60000 | ' |
+5000 |
a 40000 | | Optimized | Not optimized.
30000 | |
|
200 300 “400 ‘500
Trade Number
Created with TadeSiation, @TadeStaion Tecnologie, Inc lights sored.

FIGURE 5.3 Optimized Results Frequently Fall Apart after Testing
\n\n=== PAGE 63 ===\n49
TESTING AND EVALUATING A TRADING SYSTEM
optimizing. In general, though, the more optimization that is done, the less likely the 
system will work well going forward. 
 
■Out-of-Sample Testing 
 Only the most inexperienced and naive developers test and optimize their trading 
system over the whole historical data set. If that has been your approach up until
now, this statement may make you mad. But odds are that your real‐time trading 
results have not been good, or at least not consistently good. Much of that can be at-
tributed to evaluating the strategy’s performance on the same data it was optimized 
on. It is just not a very good practice. Trust me, I know—I used to do it all the time
before the market told me, via taking money out of my account, that I was doing
things incorrectly!
 Some developers get around this by including an out‐of‐sample period. This is 
shown in Figure  5.4 . An out‐of‐sample period will be 10 to 20 percent of the data 
reserved for review after optimization. Typically, the data left for out‐of‐sample test-
ing will be the most recent data. I have, however, seen people apply it to data before 
their optimization data. The theory behind that alternative approach is that the op-
timization should include the most recent data, so the strategy is “tuned” to current
market conditions. 
 FIGURE 5.4
 Out‐of‐Sample Testing Results 
Out-of-sample results
Actual real-time performance
would be closer to out-of-sample
results—not as good as
optimized results
Optimized results
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 63 ===\noptimizing, In general, though, the more optimization that is done, the less likely the
system will work well going forward.

| Out-of-Sample Testing

Only the most inexperienced and naive developers test and optimize their trading
system over the whole historical data set. If that has been your approach up until
now, this statement may make you mad. But odds are that your real-time trading
results have not been good, or at least not consistently good. Much of that can be at-
tributed to evaluating the strategy’s performance on the same data it was optimized

on, It is just not a very good practice. Trust me, I know—I used to do it all the time

before the market told me, via taking money out of my account, that I was doing
things incorrectly!

Some developers get around this by including an out-of-sample period. This is
shown in Figure 5.4. An out-of-sample period will be 10 to 20 percent of the data
reserved for review after optimization. Typically, the data left for out-of-sample test-
ing will be the most recent data. I have, however, seen people apply it to data before
their optimization data. The theory behind that alternative approach is that the op-
timization should include the most recent data, so the strategy is “tuned” to current
market conditions.

uy Carve Line = 9 min TS 19:0 UD 7190)

Out-of-sample results

Actual real-time performance
would be closer to out-of-sample
results—not as good as

f. optimized results
Optimized results

Created wih TradeStation. ©TradeStaion Technologies, Inc. All nights reserved.

FIGURE 5.4 Out-of-Sample Testing Results

-
Ny

WALSAS DNIGVUL ¥ ONLLYNTVAT CNY ONILSAL
\n\n=== PAGE 64 ===\n50
TESTING AND EVALUATING A TRADING SYSTEM
 Conducting a test with out‐of‐sample data is a magnitude or two better than op-
timizing over all the data, especially if the out‐of‐sample period has a signifi cant
number of trades in it. If the optimized results look good with the out‐of‐sample 
data, there is much more confi dence in the optimized results. It will likely perform 
better in real time. 
 One problem with the out‐of‐sample approach is that the optimized parameters 
are set forever. So, for example, if you optimize your trading system and get values 
X, Y, and Z as the best inputs to your system, those inputs should never change. But, 
perhaps due to changing market conditions, you do want the ability to change your 
input parameters, or at least check them on an ongoing basis. In this manner, the
out‐of‐sample test idea can be taken one step further. The resulting analysis, walk‐
forward analysis, is much better, and much closer to reality.
 
■ Walk-Forward Analysis 
 Walk‐forward analysis is much more cumbersome than traditional back tests, but 
the results are usually worth the eff ort. Walk‐forward analysis can be done by hand,
in conjunction with trading software optimization. This was the method I used to be
a top fi nisher in the World Cup contest, and I encourage you to try it by hand a few 
times to fully understand the process. After that, many trading software packages 
now include walk‐forward analysis in their available tools.
 The idea behind walk‐forward analysis is simple: the performance results and the 
optimized results are based on two diff erent data sets. This can be seen in Figure  5.5 . 
 FIGURE 5.5
Walk‐Forward Analysis 
In sample #1
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
Walk-forward #1
Walk-forward #2
Walk-forward #3
Walk-forward #4
Walk-forward #5
Walk-forward #6
Walk-forward #7
Walk-forward #8
Walk-forward #9
Walk-forward (out-of-sample period: 1 year) 
Walk-forward periods then combined into one continuous equity curve 
In sample #2
In sample #3
In sample #4
In sample #5
In sample #6
In sample #7
In sample #8
In sample #9
In-sample period: 4 years
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 64 ===\nConducting a test with out-of-sample data is a magnitude or two better than op-
timizing over all the data, especially if the out-of-sample period has a significant
number of trades in it. If the optimized results look good with the out-of-sample
data, there is much more confidence in the optimized results. It will likely perform
better in real time.

One problem with the out-of-sample approach is that the optimized parameters
are set forever. So, for example, if you optimize your trading system and get values
X,Y, and Z as the best inputs to your system, those inputs should never change. But,
perhaps due to changing market conditions, you do want the ability to change your
input parameters, or at least check them on an ongoing basis. In this manner, the
out-of-sample test idea can be taken one step further. The resulting analysis, walk-
forward analysi

is much better, and much closer to reality.

= Walk-Forward Analysis

Walk-forward analysis is much more cumbersome than traditional back tests, but
the results are usually worth the effort. Walk-forward analysis can be done by hand,
in conjunction with trading software optimization. This was the method I used to be
a top finisher in the World Cup contest, and I encourage you to try it by hand a few

w
Ss

times to fully understand the process. After that, many trading software packages
now include walk-forward analysis in their available tools.

The idea behind walk-forward analysis is simple: the performance results and the
optimized results are based on two different data sets. This can be seen in Figure 5.5.

2001 | 2002 [2003 [2004 | 2005 | 2006 | 2007 | 2008 | 2009 | 2010 | 2011 | 2012 [2013

in sample #1
‘Walk-forward #1
In sample #2
‘Walk-forward #2
In sample #3
Walk-forward #3
Tn sample #4
Walk-forward #4
Tn sample #5
Walk-forward #5
Tn sample #6
Walk-forward #6
In sample
Walk-forward #7
In sample #8
Walk-forward #8
Tn sample #9
Walk-forward #9

ING AND EVALUATING A TRADING SYSTEM.

In-sample period: 4 years
Walk-forward (out-of-sample period: 1 year)

Walk-forward periods then combined into one continuous equity curve

FIGURE 5.5 Walk-Forward Analysis
\n\n=== PAGE 65 ===\n51
TESTING AND EVALUATING A TRADING SYSTEM
Walk‐forward analysis is simply the aggregate of many out‐of‐sample periods, 
stitched together. 
 Results of walk‐forward analysis, when done correctly, can be much closer 
to reality than a simple optimized test. A sample of this is given in Figure  5.6 , 
which shows that the walk‐forward analysis, and the live results are pretty 
comparable. There is no dramatic shift in performance between live and walk‐
forward results. 
 Walk‐forward analysis is a great tool when there are a lot of historical data to 
analyze. It is my recommended method. But in cases where there is not much 
historical data, the best approach may be to test and evaluate the trading system in
real time.
 
■Real-Time Analysis 
 Some very successful traders eschew all forms of back testing due to inherent con-
fl icts and issues in such testing. These folks simply test strategies in real time, possibly 
even with real money. The obvious advantage to such a method is that fi tting rules to 
past data and using hindsight bias is just not possible. One big disadvantage is that you 
can only gather data at market speed. It is impossible to gather statistics over many
years until you have tested in real time for many years. Most people do not have the 
 FIGURE 5.6
 Walk‐Forward Testing Results 
Walk-forward test results
–10000
0
10000
20000
Equity($)
30000
40000
Real-time results
Equity Curve Line - @ECZ13 60 min.(01/02/09 08:00 – 11/12/13 15:00)
Legend
Trades
Peaks
Created with TradeStation. ©TradeStation Technologies, Inc. All rights reserved.
100
200
300
Trade Number
400
500
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 65 ===\nEquity Curve Line - @ EGZ13 60 min.(01/02/09 08:00 — 11/12/13 15:00)

40000
Walk-forward test results
20000
Real-time results.
20000
Tagen
2 — Traded
2 Peaks
2 10000
0
10000
700 200 300 00 300
Trade Number

Created with TradeStation. TradeStation Technologies, Inc.All rights ree

FIGURE 5.6 Walk-Forward Testing Results

2

Walk-forward analysis

simply the aggregate of many out-of-sample periods,

stitched together.
Results of walk-forward analys

when done correctly, can be much closer

to reality than a simple optimized test. A sample of this
which shows that the walk-forward analys

s given in Figure 5.6,

is, and the live results are pretty
comparable, There is no dramatic shift in performance between live and walk-
forward results.

Walk-forward analysis is a great tool when there are a lot of historical data to
analyze. It is my recommended method. But in cases where there is not much
historical data, the best approach may be to test and evaluate the trading system in

real time.

= Real-Time Analysis

WALSAS DNIGVUL ¥ ONLLYNTVAT CNY ONILSAL

Some very successful traders eschew all forms of back testing due to inherent con-
flicts and issues in such testing, These folks simply test strategies in real time, possibly
even with real money. The obvious advantage to such a method is that fitting rules to
past data and using hindsight bias is just not possible. One big disadvantage is that you
can only gather data at market speed. It is impossible to gather statistics over many
years until you have tested in real time for many years. Most people do not have the
\n\n=== PAGE 66 ===\n52
TESTING AND EVALUATING A TRADING SYSTEM
patience to wait for such a test to complete. Another disadvantage is that anytime the 
strategy is changed, the clock goes back to zero, and the evaluation starts fresh. This 
can really prolong the test period. 
 For the reasons cited, most people do not consider real‐time testing, even with its 
advantages, as a viable solution. In the trading system development method shown 
later in this book, however, real‐time analysis is used and provides useful verifi cation 
of a trading system. 
\n\n=== PAGE 67 ===\n53
N
ow that we have examined the primary ways to test a trading strategy and produce 
a trading performance report, I’ll share with you what I think is important 
in these reports. A typical summary performance report is shown in Figure  6.1 . A 
complete TradeStation‐produced performance report spans at least seven pages and 
includes hundreds of calculated parameters, trade lists, and performance graphs. 
The amount of information supplied is frankly overwhelming. Most of the results, it 
turns out, are not all that important when time comes to evaluate the trading system. 
Maybe a performance metric for “drawdown—coeffi  cient of variation” matters to 
some people but certainly not to me. 
 As with most aspects of trading, I try to keep my performance report analysis 
simple. A few numbers are typically all that I need to conduct a cursory review of any 
trading system. Once I fi nd something I like, then I will delve deeper.
 First, a few ground rules are in order. The performance report should be based either 
on live data or on a walk‐forward test. Optimized back tests should not even be analyzed, 
as their results are bogus and misleading. Next, there should be multiple years of data, 
with a multitude of trades. A good rule of thumb is 5 to 10 years of data, and 30 to 100 
trades for each trading rule in the system. Third, I usually review performance reports 
without position sizing applied. As you review many performance reports, it will be 
important to compare “apples to apples.” If you look at one performance report based 
on single‐contract trades and try to compare it to another report that uses multiple‐
contract‐position sizing, a fair comparison is all but impossible. Plus, a bad strategy can be 
made to look appealing by position sizing. To keep it simple, I look at position sizing only 
after I feel confi dent the strategy is viable trading one contract at a time. 
 Finally, accurate assumptions for commission and slippage must be included 
in the report. Many times I see performance reports without these values add-
ed in, with the fl ippant response from the creator, “Those costs can be added in 
 Preliminary Analysis
 C H A P T E R   6  
\n\n=== PAGE 68 ===\n54
PRELIMINARY ANALYSIS
later, no problem.” Not including commissions and slippage, beyond being highly 
unethical—if not immoral—due to the way these costs impact a trading system, 
suggests that the developer doesn’t really understand proper strategy develop-
ment. It can easily be shown how testing without commissions and slippage leads 
one to select trading systems that trade more often, with lower average profi t per 
trade. For example, if you optimize based on net profi t or something similar, the 
optimizer will usually give you a best set of parameters that make you trade too 
much. Here is an example:
 FIGURE 6.1
Sample Performance Report 
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 68 ===\nw
BAY

PRELIMINARY ANALYSIS

Alltrades
Total Net Profit $34,932.50
Gross Profit $88,760.00
Gross Loss ($53,827.50)
Profit Factor 1.65
Total Number of Trades au
Percent Profitable 49.39%
Winning Trades 203
Losing Trades 208
Even Trades °
‘Avg. Trade Net Profit $84.99
‘Avg. Winning Trade $437.24
‘Avg. Losing Trade ($258.79)
Ratio Avg. Win:Avg. Loss 1.69
Largest Winning Trade $2,407.50
Largest Losing Trade ($442.50)
Max. Consecutwe Winning Trades 8
Max. Consecutive Losing Trades 9
‘Aug. Bars in Winning Trades 4.79
‘Avg. Bars in Losing Trades 2.56
‘Avg. Bars in Even Trades 0.00
Max. Shares/Contracts Held 1
Total Shares/Contracts Held aun
‘Account Size Required $3,522.50
Return on Initial Capital 34.93%
‘Annual Rate of Return 6.29%
Return Retracement Ratio 0.36
RINA Index 5068.08
Trading Period 4 Yrs, 9 Mths, 5 Dys, 5 Hrs
Percent of Time in the Market 2.64%
Max. Equity Run-up $36,030.00
Max. Drawdown (Intra-day Peak to Valley)

Value ($4,160.00)
Niet Profit as % of Drawdown 839.72%
Max. Drawdown (Trade Close to Trade Close)

Value ($3,522.50)
Net Profit as % of Drawdown 991.70%

Long Trades
$18,660.00
$44,435.00

($25,775.00)

1.72

203
53.20%
108

95

°

$91.92
$411.44
($271.32)
1.52
$1,620.00
($442.50)

8

5
5.09
2.52
0.00

1
203
$2,370.00

($2,792.50)
668.22%

($2,370.00)
787.34%

‘Short Trades
$16,272.50
$44,325.00

($28,052.50)

1.58

208
45.67%
9s

113

0

$78.23
$466.58
($248.25)
1.88
$2,407.50
($442.50)

8

9
4.45
2.59
0.00

a
208
$2,565.00

($3,082.50)
$33.09%

($2,565.00)
624.41%

Performance Summary | Trede Analysis | Trades List | Periodical Retuns | Performance Graphs | Trade Grephs | Settings

(Created weh TradeStation, CTradeStaton Techrcogies, Ine. Al nghs reserved

FIGURE 6.1 Sample Performance Report

later, no problem,” Not including commissions and slippage, beyond being highly

unethical—if not immoral—due to the way these costs impact a trading system,

suggests that the developer doesn’t really understand proper strategy develop-

ment. It can easily be shown how testing without commissions and slippage leads

one to select trading systems that trade more often, with lower average profit per

trade. For example, if you optimize based on net profit or something similar, the

optimizer will usually give you a best set of parameters that make you trade too

much, Here is an example:

\n\n=== PAGE 69 ===\n55
PRELIMINARY ANALYSIS
 Without Slippage or Commission
 Parameter Setting 1: Gross profi t/trade = $25, 1,000 trades, gross profi t = $25,000 
 Parameter Setting 2: Gross profi t/trade = $50, 300 trades, gross profi t = $15,000 
 The optimizer will select Setting 1 as superior. 
 With $25 Slippage and Commission 
 Parameter Setting 1: Net profi t/trade = $0, 1,000 trades, gross profi t = $0
 Parameter Setting 2: Net profi t/trade = $25, 300 trades, net profi t = $7,500 
 The optimizer will now select Setting 2 as superior. 
 Which approach is better? Well, in the fi rst scenario, such a system in the real 
world will churn the average trader until his account is depleted. It is defi nitely not 
as simple as “you can add commissions and slippage in later.” The second scenario, 
however, produces a result that is far more realistic and believable. So, all other 
things being equal, optimizing with slippage and commissions is an approach much 
closer to reality and should always be used. 
 With these basic ground rules in place, the first number I look at is the 
total net profit. This seems self‐evident, since if there is no profit, why bother 
looking at the report any further? It may be that the net profit shown is not 
worthwhile, either due to the time period involved or the drawdown that has 
to be endured, but there should be profit nonetheless. In my experience, with 
a walk‐forward back test, the annual net profit should be $5,000 per year per 
contract minimum, preferably $10,000 or more. Any amount less than this will 
likely not be worthwhile on a risk‐adjusted basis or will not have enough trades 
to be significant.
 Profi t factor is the next number I review. Obviously, higher numbers are better 
here. Many people say that only profi t factors greater than 2.0 are acceptable, but
I don’t share this view. To me, anything over 1.0 has at least some merit, so I don’t 
discard any systems between 1.0 and 2.0 just based on this number. I do fi nd that 
profi t factors below 1.5 generally have a hard time making it through the rest of the 
steps in the development process, though. 
 I always review total number of trades to ensure that enough trades are being 
taken during the test period. If, for example, the report contains only 5 trades, 
just how valid can the results actually be? I generally use a rough guide of 30 to 100 
trades minimum per strategy rule. So, for example, if I have four strategy rules, 
I’d like to see at least 120 to 400 trades in the report. Obviously, the more trades 
the better.
 Average trade net profi t is the next performance number I look at. Since this 
number is after commissions and slippage, it is a great and easy way to compare trad-
ing systems. I generally like to see $50 or more per trade average, based on trading
one contract. For average trade values less than $50, the system might still be viable, 
\n\n=== PAGE 70 ===\n56
PRELIMINARY ANALYSIS
but the closer you ride to that $0 breakeven line, the less leeway you allow for er-
rors, mistakes, slight changes in performance, and the like. 
 The next number I review is average losing trade, which I combine with the aver-
age trade net profi t to calculate expectancy. There is a lot of confusion about expec-
tancy and how to calculate it, so I will explain it here. 
 Many traders calculate expectancy in this way: 
 Expectancy = average $ winners * win % + average $ losers * lose %
 
= average trade
where average $ losers is a negative number 
 Note that this is also the average trade net profi t. So calculating an expectancy us-
ing this equation does not provide any additional information beyond what is already
known with the average trade net profi t.
 An alternative expectancy can be calculated as follows: 
 Expectancy = (average $ winners * win % + average $ losers * lose %)/ 
(−average $ losers)
 This metric is useful since it is a risk‐adjusted value. It basically states for every 
dollar you risk, what is your expected return? So with an expectancy of 0.2, you’d 
expect to receive 20 cents in gains for every $1 you put at risk. This expectancy has
been heavily touted by trading psychologist and educator Dr. Van Tharp, so to avoid
future confusion, I will refer to this calculation as “Tharp Expectancy.”  To me, it is
much more valuable than the fi rst method of calculating expectancy. 
 For the Tharp Expectancy, I generally look for values greater than 0.1. Anything 
below this threshold will be diffi  cult to trade and likely will demand too much risk 
for too little reward. 
 The next numbers I look at in the performance report are total slippage and 
total commission. If the numbers are $0, I immediately discard the report and 
ignore all other results I may have seen. There is no such thing as cost‐free trading, 
so any performance report showing that is bogus. In general, I need to see $5 per 
round turn trade per contract for commissions. That is a typical value charged by 
a discount broker, after all exchange fees, National Futures Association fees, and 
so on are added in. Commissions can be less than this, especially if you do a lot 
of volume or if you are an exchange member, but the $5 fi gure is appropriate for 
most retail traders.
 Total slippage is an even more critical number than total commission. Many 
developers, especially those who have never traded before, consistently underesti-
mate the amount of slippage experienced in the real world. I defi ne slippage as the 
\n\n=== PAGE 71 ===\n57
PRELIMINARY ANALYSIS
diff erence between what the software strategy back‐test engine gives for fi lls and
what your actual fi lls are. For example, many strategy engines assume buy fi lls at
the bid, when in real trading you’ll buy at the ask. The diff erence is what I consider 
slippage. Based on my experience, I assume the following slippage values for heavily 
traded markets: 
 
■ Market orders: 1 to 2 ticks slippage per round turn. 
 
■ Stop orders: 1 to 2 ticks slippage per round turn. 
 
■ Limit orders: 0 ticks slippage. 
 The tricky part is that a typical trading strategy will have some mix of market, 
limit, and stop orders. In that case, if you can apply only one slippage value to each 
trade, what should it be? I fi nd being conservative in this situation helps. I will 
generally apply 1.5 to 2.0 ticks of slippage per round turn trade for these mixed‐
order‐type strategies. I fi nd this generally a bit pessimistic, but it is better than un-
derestimating the slippage costs and being disappointed with real‐world results.
 The fi nal number I look at in the performance report is maximum drawdown. I 
have no set criteria for a drawdown limit, but if I see a $10,000 maximum drawdown 
for a strategy that produces only $15,000 net profi t, alarm bells go off . In the back 
of my mind, I look at the drawdown knowing that I can expect to see an even larger 
drawdown at some point during live trading. If I can’t handle the drawdown, I’ll 
discard the system immediately. Otherwise, I know that high risk, low rewards will 
be tossed out during later steps, so I don’t eliminate the strategy just yet.
 There are arguably other important numbers in the performance report, to be 
certain. Many people, for example, put a lot of faith in winning percentage, or 
Sharpe ratio, or one of the hundreds of other metrics. The fact is that all metrics
are important to an extent, and the developer should try to fi nd ones he or she is 
comfortable with. Ultimately, any metrics relied upon should prove themselves by 
leading to successful real‐time strategies. 
 Once I am done reviewing the performance report, I generally take a look at 
some of the trade graphs. I am interested in one chart in particular: the closed 
trade equity graph. If you are a visual learner, just looking at an equity curve—
either a closed trade equity curve or a daily equity curve (shown in Figure  6.2 )—
might tell you all you need to know. Here are the main things I look for in an 
equity chart. 
 The fi rst thing I look for in an equity curve is the slope. If the chart is not steadily 
going from lower left to upper right, it may not be a very good strategy. The problem 
is that the chart can be distorted by the scaling used. So it is also important to look 
at the end equity, and then divide that by the number of years in the curve. That will 
give you an annual average profi t and a good indication of whether the strategy is at 
all worthwhile. 
\n\n=== PAGE 72 ===\n58
PRELIMINARY ANALYSIS
 After the slope, I like to look for fl at periods. Flat periods are obviously better 
than periods of drawdown, but many periods, punctuated by rapid rises, should be
cause for concern. Such an equity curve suggests that the strategy may have caught 
only a few good trades, possibly because of curve fi tting or overoptimization. Flat
periods could also be caused by government intervention, for example the United
States quantitative easing programs (QE, QE2, QE3) in the 2009–2013 time frame.
In this case, it might be okay to assume that performance will improve when gov-
ernment intervention ends. Of course, when, if ever, will some sort of government 
intervention end, and who can predict it? 
 The third major item I look for is drawdown periods. How severe are the draw-
downs, and how long does the strategy take to recover from these drawdowns? 
Answers to these questions will give you an idea of what to expect if you trade
this strategy for real. Drawdowns in the future may be more severe, and may last
longer—your position sizing and money management should assume that both of 
these things will happen—but you can at least get a sense of what to expect. 
 The absence of any drawdowns on the equity curve should also be cause for 
concern. I know of no real system, except for money deposited in a savings account, 
that has only a small or no drawdown. Again, the curve has to “look” realistic. Reward
with no risk is not realistic. 
 A fi nal item I review on equity charts is the “fuzziness” of the curve. This cannot be 
seen on a closed equity chart, but it can be seen on a daily equity chart. The fuzzier
the curve, the more the daily results jump around, moving up and down short term, 
 FIGURE 6.2
Sample Equity Curve 
–10000
0
10000
20000
Equity($)
30000
40000
Equity Curve Detailed - @ECZ13 60 min.(01/02/09 08:00 – 11/12/13 15:00)
Legend
Equity Curve
Created with TradeStation. ©TradeStation Technologies, Inc. All rights reserved.
12/15/09
11/29/10
11/10/11
10/24/12
10/8/13
2/6/2009 10:00:00 AM – 11/12/2013 3:00:00 PM
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 72 ===\nwo

8

a
=
Z
a
ES
z
FS
a
a

Equity Curve Detailed - @ECZ13 60 min.(01/02/09 08:00 — 11/12/13 15:00)
40000

aaa
30000 ibe fe!

20000
oly) Legend
— Equity Curve
10000

pawl \e

6 Tvl

10000

12/15/09 11/29/10 MON 10/24/12 10/8/13,
2/6/2009 10:00:00 AM ~ 11/12/2013 3:00:00 PM

Created with TradeStation. TradeStation Technologies, Inc. Al rights reserve.

FIGURE 6.2 Sample Equity Curve

After the slope, I like to look for flat periods. Flat periods are obviously better
should be
cause for concern. Such an equity curve suggests that the strategy may have caught

than periods of drawdown, but many periods, punctuated by rapid rises

only a few good trades, possibly because of curve fitting or overoptimization. Flat
periods could also be caused by government intervention, for example the United
States quantitative easing programs (QE, QE2, QE3) in the 2009-2013 time frame.
In this case, it might be okay to assume that performance will improve when gov-
ernment intervention ends. Of course, when, if ever, will some sort of government
intervention end, and who can predict it?

The third major item I look for is drawdown periods. How severe are the draw-

downs, and how long does the strategy take to recover from these drawdowns?

Answers to these questions will give you an idea of what to expect if you trade
this strategy for real. Drawdowns in the future may be more severe, and may last

longer—your position sizing and money management should assume that both of

these things will happen—but you can at least get a sense of what to expect.

The absence of any drawdowns on the equity curve should also be cause for
concern. I know of no real system, except for money deposited in a savings account,
that has only a small or no drawdown. Again, the curve has to “look” realistic. Reward
with no risk is not realistic.

A final item I review on equity charts is the “fuzziness” of the curve. This cannot be
seen on a closed equity chart, but it can be seen on a daily equity chart. The fuzzier
the curve, the more the daily results jump around, moving up and down short term,
\n\n=== PAGE 73 ===\n59
PRELIMINARY ANALYSIS
even if the longer‐term trend is up. Curves that are very fuzzy are harder to trade, 
harder to position size, and harder to emotionally deal with. Think about it: if System 
A gains $200 on day 1, loses $200 on day 2, and gains $75 on day 3, is that preferable 
to System B, which gains a steady $25 per day? Both have the same end result, but 
the fuzziness of System A makes it less appealing than System B. 
 Obviously, just looking at an equity curve is by no means a very scientific or 
very rigorous way to evaluate a trading system. But it can be useful for prelimi-
nary analysis. There is no need to look at performance report details if you do 
not like the look of the equity curve. In those cases, you can save a lot of time by 
spending a few seconds staring at the equity curve and then rejecting a system 
you do not like. 
 The discussion thus far has focused on simple, quick numbers and methods to 
evaluate the performance of a trading system. Such analysis is useful in the early 
stages of development, where most strategies are junk, and a fast, cursory review can 
eliminate them, freeing up more time for you as the developer to create new systems.
But, eventually, you will need to do in‐depth analysis of performance results. That is
a whole diff erent animal. 
\n\n=== PAGE 74 ===\n\n\n=== PAGE 75 ===\n61
 A
s the development of a trading strategy progresses, the analysis also progresses, 
and the performance hurdles a strategy must meet to be considered viable get 
more stringent. My primary method of analysis at the later stages is Monte Carlo 
analysis. But before I explain how I run the analysis and what I look for in results, I’ll 
fi rst briefl y describe the process. 
 
■ What Is Monte Carlo Analysis?
 Monte Carlo analysis, or simulation, sounds like a daunting topic, but actually it is 
not. With the Monte Carlo spreadsheet I created, which you can download for free 
(www.wiley.com/go/algotradingsystems), the analysis is pretty simple. But what is 
it actually? 
 Think about the individual trades in your strategy. These trades taken sequentially, 
in the order they occurred, yield the strategy equity curve. But what if the order of 
those was diff erent? Could the drawdown become more severe? Could the end eq-
uity be diff erent? These are the questions Monte Carlo analysis can answer. 
 In its simplest form, you can think of it this way: First, get a number of little 
pieces of paper, one for each trade in your strategy. Then, write down one trade 
result on each piece of paper. Once you have all trades accounted for, put all the 
pieces in a hat. Randomly choose one. That is your fi rst trade. Record it, adding it to 
your initial equity, and then put the piece of paper back in the hat (this is referred to 
as random sampling with replacement). Then, pick another piece of paper, record its 
value, and add it to the existing equity curve you are building.
 If you do this for a number of trades, you’ll have a possible equity curve. If you 
perform the whole analysis many, many times, you’ll have a family of equity curves. 
Each one represents a possible way that trades in your strategy could have occurred. 
 Detailed Analysis 
 C H A P T E R   7  
\n\n=== PAGE 76 ===\n62
DETAILED ANALYSIS
Using the family of possible curves, you can get statistics about your trading system. 
These statistics can help you evaluate a strategy, determine a position sizing ap-
proach, and give you realistic scenarios for what you might face if you actually trade 
the strategy live. Of course, this all assumes that the historically derived trades will
be the same as the trades in the future. If your historical trades are based on fl awed 
development, future results will be garbage.
 Obviously, there are some potentially serious drawbacks to this analysis. First, 
the analysis assumes that the trades in your performance report are the only possible 
trades that can happen. This is obviously false, since when you start trading live, any 
result is possible for a particular trade. But, if the distribution (overall mean and 
standard deviation) of the trades is accurate, then the Monte Carlo approach can
yield meaningful results. 
 A second drawback is that this analysis assumes that each trade is independent of 
the previous trade, a condition commonly referred to as serial or auto correlation. 
For most trading strategies, this is not an issue. However, if you have a strategy in 
which the trade results depend on each other, simple Monte Carlo analysis is not 
appropriate. An example of such a situation would be if the trade B signal is depen-
dent on the outcome of the previous trade A. You ideally should check for it before
using the Monte Carlo analysis. One method for checking for serial correlation is the
Durbin Watson statistic. Although it is beyond the scope of this book, you can fi nd 
details, examples, and spreadsheets on this calculation on the Internet. 
 If you fi nd that your trades do exhibit serial correlation, the simple Monte Carlo 
analysis may not be appropriate to use. In such cases, you could try to use a Monte 
Carlo simulation that included serial correlation eff ects, or you could gather statistics 
from a method called “start trade analysis” or “moving start analysis.” In this analysis, 
you simulate the start of trading at each trade, and gather the statistics for return 
and drawdown. For example, if you have 10 trades,  i , i + 1, … i + 9 in your sample, 
you’d fi rst create an equity curve starting with trade i . From the resulting curve, you 
could get the drawdown  d id  . Then, start the equity curve at trade  i + 1 . This curve 
would give you the drawdown  d id +1 . If you continue through all the trades, you can
analyze the set of drawdowns  d. This method may be a bit more cumbersome than
Monte Carlo, but it is a better way to analyze the data when you have serial correc-
tion, since trade sequence will be mostly preserved. 
 Assuming you can live with the drawbacks listed, Monte Carlo can help you an-
swer the following questions:
 
■ What is my risk of ruin for a given account size? 
 
■ What are the chances of my system’s having a maximum drawdown of X percent? 
 
■ What kind of annual return can I expect from this trading system? 
 
■ Is the risk I am taking to trade this strategy appropriate for the return I am receiving? 
\n\n=== PAGE 77 ===\n63
DETAILED ANALYSIS
 Each of these questions will be addressed in the discussion that follows. To sim-
plify the narrative, I will assume the reader is using my Monte Carlo spreadsheet. 
Any Monte Carlo simulator available to the public should be able to give the same 
results, although some of the terminology and assumptions used may be diff erent. 
Therefore, whether you use the simulator or not, the discussion will still be 
useful for you. 
 
■Inputs to Monte Carlo Simulator 
 There are only a few required inputs to perform Monte Carlo simulation. These are 
listed below, and are shown in Figure  7.1 .
Base Starting Equity. This is the starting amount of your account, in dollars.
Stop Trading if Equity Drops Below $. This is the amount of capital below which you
will cease trading. For example, if you enter $3,500 here, once your equity, on
a closed‐trade basis, drops below $3,500, you will not be permitted to trade 
anymore. Your account will be considered “ruined.” At a minimum, this value 
must be greater than the initial margin for one contract of the instrument your 
system is trading. In the preceding example, you could trade only products that 
had an initial margin below $3,500. If you wanted to trade a higher‐margin
instrument, such as gold (currently at $8,800 initial margin), you would have
to increase this minimum amount. As a rule, I never recommend trading with 
 FIGURE 7.1  Monte Carlo Simulator Inputs 
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 77 ===\nEach of these questions will be addressed in the discussion that follows. To sim-
plify the narrative, I will assume the reader is using my Monte Carlo spreadsheet.
Any Monte Carlo simulator available to the public should be able to give the same
results, although some of the terminology and assumptions used may be different.
Therefore, whether you use the simulator or not, the discussion will still be
useful for you.

| Inputs to Monte Carlo Simulator

There are only a few required inputs to perform Monte Carlo simulation. These are
listed below, and are shown in Figure 7.1.

Base Starting Equity. This is the starting amount of your account, in dollars.

Stop Trading if Equity Drops Below $. This is the amount of capital below which you
will cease trading. For example, if you enter $3,500 here, once your equity, on
a closed-trade basis, drops below $3,500, you will not be permitted to trade
anymore. Your account will be considered “ruined.” At a minimum, this value
must be greater than the initial margin for one contract of the instrument your
system is trading, In the preceding example, you could trade only products that
had an initial margin below $3,500. If you wanted to trade a higher-margin
instrument, such as gold (currently at $8,800 initial margin), you would have
to increase this minimum amount. As a rule, I never recommend trading with

[_ sa

FIGURE 7.1 Monte Carlo Simulator Inputs

a
w

SISKIVNY CaT1IVLIG
\n\n=== PAGE 78 ===\n64
DETAILED ANALYSIS
only enough capital to just meet the margin requirement, but for this simula-
tion, the assumption is acceptable. 
# Trades, 1 Year. This is simply the number of trades that your system takes in a 
one‐year period. My simulator is designed to trade for only one year, so each 
equity curve generated will consist of this number of trades. That is, of course, 
assuming the ruin point is not hit fi rst.
Individual Trade Results. This column of data contains all the trade data, one trade
per row. All trades should be based on the same reference point, that is, per
contract, per day, and so on. You cannot mix some trades that were based on 
one contract with trades that had multiple contracts.
 
■ Limitations of the Simulator
 To keep things simple, the simulator makes a few assumptions. First, it is assumed 
that one contract is traded for each trade. There is no position sizing built into the
simulator. Second, the simulator assumes one year of trading. Both of these assump-
tions can be changed in the Excel macro code by anyone who understands macro
programming language.
 In the discussion that follows, a “run” or iteration is defi ned as the generation of 
one single equity curve. In a “simulation,” there will be a number of runs—in the
simulator discussed, this is 2,500 runs. To generate statistics, such as risk of ruin or
median return, the results of a simulation (2,500 individual runs) are used.
 
■ Simulator Output 
 Once the simulator runs, a table of output values and corresponding curves will be 
generated, as depicted in Figure  7.2 . Following is an explanation of each output val-
ue, how to interpret it, and what values I consider appropriate for a tradable system. 
 Starting Equity 
 This is the size of your account at the start of the Monte Carlo analysis. All rates of 
return are calculated based on this number, and risk of ruin and maximum draw-
down are both heavily infl uenced by it. The simulator uses a range of diff erent start-
ing equities in order to generate the table and the output curves. 
 Risk of Ruin 
 This statistic tells you the chances (probability) that within a year’s time, your 
account will be wiped out (i.e., fall below the “Stop Trading if Equity Drops 
\n\n=== PAGE 79 ===\n65
DETAILED ANALYSIS
Below $”). For example, if the risk of ruin is 12 percent, that means within the 
first year of trading the system, you have a 12 percent chance of having to cease 
trading.
 Risk of ruin is an extremely important statistic, especially for traders with small 
accounts. The risk of ruin can be signifi cant for small accounts, even if the system is 
a winning system! Here is an example that should make that clear: 
 Let’s say you have a very good day trading system. It trades two times a day. Win-
ning trades are $200 after all costs, 50 percent of the time. When it loses the other
50 percent of the time, it loses $175 net.
 Per day, on average, you’d make $25 a day. In a year, you’d make $6,300 per 
contract. If you traded this with a $10,000 account, always with one contract, you’d 
make a 63 percent annual return, with somewhere around 15 percent maximum
drawdown. By most measures that is really good. 
 Now, let’s say you take this positive expectancy system and trade it with a small 
account, $5,000 and under. Let’s say your broker allows $500 day trading margin, 
so that is your “ruin” point—if your account drops below $500, you are ruined and 
you quit trading. 
 In one year of trading, how likely are you to be ruined (drop below $500 and 
cease trading)? The results, depicted in Figure  7.3 , might surprise you. 
 The question is: where do you feel most comfortable being on this curve? The 
person with $1,500 is probably panicking after each loss, since he doesn’t have much
wiggle room. But the trader with $5,000—still a small account, only 3.3 times the 
fi rst trader’s account—is 20 times less likely to be ruined.  
 FIGURE 7.2  Monte Carlo Simulator Outputs 
INPUTS
Base Starting Equity $
Stop Trading if Equity Drops
Below $
# Trades, 1 Year
System Name
5,000
3,000
99
Euro Day
Monte Carlo Simulator
RESULTS
Start Equity
$5,000
$7,811
$8,049
$8,136
$7,968
$8,268
$8,093
$8,093
$7,943
$8,280
$8,143
$8,049
13%
4%
1%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
28.0%
23.7%
20.7%
18.5%
16.6%
14.2%
15.5%
13.1%
12.1%
11.6%
11.0%
46%
50%
55%
58%
65%
72%
83%
91%
108%
129%
156%
94%
96%
97%
97%
97%
97%
97%
97%
97%
97%
4.08
4.33
4.53
4.28
4.50
4.60
4.98
4.85
5.10
5.45
5.65
86%
$6,250
$7,500
$8,750
$10,000
$11,250
$12,500
$13,750
$15,000
$16,250
$17,500
Ruin
Median
Drawdown
Median $
Prof
Median Return
Return/DD
Prob > 0
Annual Rate of Return
Annual Rate of Return/Drawdown
Return/Drawdown
Annual Rate of Return
180%
160%
140%
120%
100%
80%
60%
40%
20%
0%
$0
$5,000
$10,000
$15,000
$20,000
Start Equity
$0
0.00
1.00
2.00
3.00
4.00
5.00
6.00
$5,000
$10,000
$15,000
$20,000
Start Equity
Individual Trade Results
Profit/Loss
$107.50
$207.50
$807.50
$520.00
$270.00
$45.00
$920.00
$1,032.50
($292.50)
($292.50)
$157.50
$320.00
$282.50
($42.50)
($292.50)
$432.50
($292.50)
($292.50)
($292.50)
Results
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 79 ===\nWants Cao Simulator

INPUTS
Bose Sarng auty S| 00 RESULTS
‘Sop Tang Eat Drove
Geos] 3000
‘SplonNane| Ewe Dey

sora Results
oma,

0750

sans)

tana,

seors0 Tara alt etiam

forte) dou at Pt

f2m00 ws a

3500 tow soo | ---

somo 1 i

sioeso | £208 i oe

‘sans MOS a0 | -

tse) i woe a

sooo i

sno ES ' ees ee)

fates Es + 0

so so 50m 0ow tS san so som staan sisowo sano
cs sony a tay
2250

FIGURE 7.2 Monte Carlo Simulator Outputs.

Below $”). For example, if the risk of ruin is 12 percent, that means within the
first year of trading the system, you have a 12 percent chance of having to cease
trading.

Risk of ruin is an extremely important statistic, especially for traders with small
accounts. The risk of ruin can be significant for small accounts, even if the system is
a winning system! Here is an example that should make that clear:

Let’s say you have a very good day trading system. It trades two times a day. Win-
ning trades are $200 after all costs, 50 percent of the time. When it loses the other
50 percent of the time, it loses $175 net.

Per day, on average, you’d make $25 a day. In a year, you’d make $6,300 per
contract. If you traded this with a $10,000 account, always with one contract, you'd
make a 63 percent annual return, with somewhere around 15 percent maximum
drawdown. By most measures that is really good.

Now, let’s say you take this positive expectancy system and trade it with a small
account, $5,000 and under. Let’s say your broker allows $500 day trading margin,
so that is your “ruin” point—if your account drops below $500, you are ruined and
you quit trading.

In one year of trading, how likely are you to be ruined (drop below $500 and
cease trading)? The results, depicted in Figure 7.3, might surprise you.

The question is: where do you feel most comfortable being on this curve? The
person with § 1,500 is probably panicking after each loss, since he doesn’t have much
wiggle room. But the trader with $5,000—still a small account, only 3.3 times the
first trader’s account—is 20 times less likely to be ruined.

a
a

SISKIVNY CaT1IVLIG
\n\n=== PAGE 80 ===\n66
DETAILED ANALYSIS
 The conclusion is that being underfunded can be disastrous,  even with a winning
system. So I pay a lot of attention to the risk‐of‐ruin number that the simulator
outputs. Any value above 10 percent means, for me, that I am trying to trade the 
system with too little capital, and that I should increase the amount of capital to get
below 10 percent. Obviously, systems with 0 to 1 percent probability of ruin are
the best, but as with anything in trading, it is a trade‐off  with rate of return. In my
experience, I have found that simulation results with less than 10 percent risk of ruin 
are fairly safe, while still providing an acceptable rate of return. 
 Median Drawdown 
 This statistic can be a bit confusing at fi rst. It is actually the median value of the maxi-
mum drawdown. Are you confused yet? Perhaps breaking it into pieces will help. 
 First, the maximum drawdown is the maximum percentage drop in account size 
from an equity peak. It should always be measured from the previous equity peak. 
Figure  7.4 gives an example of three diff erent drawdowns: 
 Drawdown 1: $5,000 drawdown, after peak equity of $20,000 = $5,000/ 
$20,000 = 25 percent drawdown
 Drawdown 2: $10,000 drawdown, after peak equity of $30,000 = $10,000/ 
$30,000 = 33 percent drawdown
 Drawdown 3: $15,000 drawdown, after peak equity of $60,000 = $15,000/ 
$60,000 = 25 percent drawdown 
 FIGURE 7.3
 Account Size and Risk of Ruin
0%
$0
$1,000
$2,000
$3,000
$4,000
$5,000
$6,000
Risk of Ruin
Start Equity
Chances of Ruin in One Year
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
50%
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 80 ===\nDETAILED ANALYSIS | &

Chances of Ruin in One Year

if
5
ic
i
i
2
cc

$0 $1,000 $2,000 $3,000» $4,000 $5,000 — $6,000
Start Equity

FIGURE 7.3 Account Size and Risk of Ruin

The conclusion is that being underfunded can be disastrous, even with a winning
system. So I pay a lot of attention to the risk-of-ruin number that the simulator
outputs. Any value above 10 percent means, for me, that I am trying to trade the
system with too little capital, and that I should increase the amount of capital to get
below 10 percent. Obviously, systems with 0 to 1 percent probability of ruin are
the best, but as with anything in trading, it is a trade-off with rate of return. In my
experience, I have found that simulation results with less than 10 percent risk of ruin
are fairly safe, while still providing an acceptable rate of return.

Median Drawdown

This statistic can be a bit confusing at first. It is actually the median value of the maxi-
mum drawdown, Are you confused yet? Perhaps breaking it into pieces will help.

First, the maximum drawdown is the maximum percentage drop in account size
from an equity peak. It should always be measured from the previous equity peak.
Figure 7.4 gives an example of three different drawdowns:

Drawdown 1: $5,000 drawdown, after peak equity of $20,000 = $5,000/
$20,000 = 25 percent drawdown

Drawdown 2: $10,000 drawdown, after peak equity of $30,000 = $10,000/
$30,000 = 33 percent drawdown

Drawdown 3: $15,000 drawdown, after peak equity of $60,000 = $15,000/
$60,000 = 25 percent drawdown
\n\n=== PAGE 81 ===\n67
DETAILED ANALYSIS
 In this example, the maximum percentage drawdown occurs during drawdown 
2 and is 33 percent. It is interesting to note that it is the maximum percentage 
drawdown, not the absolute dollar maximum drawdown (drawdown 3, in dollar 
amounts, is higher than drawdown 2). 
 For every simulation run, there will be a corresponding maximum percentage 
drawdown. Over a great number of simulation runs, there will be a distribu-
tion of maximum drawdowns, varying from 0 percent (no drawdown at all, a 
hopelessly pie‐in‐the‐sky case), to 100 percent (a complete ruin from the peak 
equity point, down to $0 equity). This distribution will have a median value, 
which means that 50 percent of the drawdown values exceed the median, and 
50 percent are below it. Therefore, in the term “median maximum drawdown,” 
the word maximum refers to the largest drawdown in a particular simulation run, 
and median refers to the midpoint of maximum drawdowns over a large number
of simulation runs.
 There is no magic in selecting the median maximum drawdown to be the output 
value for the simulation. It could easily be the 30 percent, 60 percent, 90 percent, 
and so on, percentile value, too. I chose the median value just to use for comparison 
purposes to other systems. If I instead wanted a worst‐case value, I could have used
the 95th percentile value of drawdown, meaning only 5 percent of maximum draw-
downs are worse than this value. 
 FIGURE 7.4
Maximum Drawdown Explained 
Drawdown 2 is the largest
percentage drawdown, even
though it is not the largest dollar
drawdown
Drawdown 1
$5,000, 25% 
12/07/12 
1/26/13 
3/17/13 
05/06/13 06/25/13 
Date 
08/14/13 10/03/13 11/22/13 01/11/14 
Account Equity 
Drawdown 2
$10,000, 33% 
Drawdown 3
$15,000, 25% 
$5,000 
$15,000 
$25,000 
$35,000 
$45,000 
$55,000 
$65,000 
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 81 ===\n$65,000
Drawdown 2 is the largest Drawdown 3
$55,000 percentage drawdown, even $15,000, 25% \
" though it is not the largest dollar
drawdown
$45,000 i \ J
ES +
i Drawdown 2
f= $35,000 ‘ a $10,000, 33% i i
3 at
8
I< Drawdown 1
$25,000 $5,000, 25% i
$15,000
$5,000
12/07/12 1/26/13 3/17/13 05/06/13 06/25/13 08/14/13 10/03/13 11/22/13 O1/11/14
Date

FIGURE 7.4 Maximum Drawdown Explained

In this example, the maximum percentage drawdown occurs during drawdown
2 and is 33 percent. It is interesting to note that it is the maximum percentage
drawdown, not the absolute dollar maximum drawdown (drawdown 3, in dollar

amounts, is higher than drawdown 2).

For every simulation run, there will be a corresponding maximum percentage
drawdown. Over a great number of simulation runs, there will be a distribu-
tion of maximum drawdowns, varying from 0 percent (no drawdown at all, a
hopelessly pie-in-the-sky case), to 100 percent (a complete ruin from the peak
equity point, down to $0 equity). This distribution will have a median value,
which means that 50 percent of the drawdown values exceed the median, and
50 percent are below it. Therefore, in the term “median maximum drawdown,”
the word maximum refers to the largest drawdown in a particular simulation run,
and median refers to the midpoint of maximum drawdowns over a large number
of simulation runs.

There is no magic in selecting the median maximum drawdown to be the output
value for the simulation. It could easily be the 30 percent, 60 percent, 90 percent,
and so on, percentile value, too. I chose the median value just to use for comparison
purposes to other systems. If I instead wanted a worst-case value, I could have used
the 95th percentile value of drawdown, meaning only 5 percent of maximum draw-
downs are worse than this value.

67

Lad

=
5
5
>
Z
S
=
a
\n\n=== PAGE 82 ===\n68
DETAILED ANALYSIS
 Based on my own personal preference, I generally accept up to a 40 percent me-
dian maximum drawdown. That is, within 1 year I have a 50 percent chance of reach-
ing a 40 percent maximum drawdown. This may be too extreme for most people,
but it suits my objectives and my personality. 
 One thing to keep in mind with maximum drawdown is that traders, especially 
new traders, have a tendency to greatly overestimate their ability to withstand 
a drawdown. Based on my conversations with various traders, I have found that 
traders can generally handle half the maximum drawdown they think they can 
handle. For instance, if a trader decides before trading a system that he can handle 
a 30 percent maximum drawdown, when real money is on the line, he will start 
to panic, and likely quit or change the system, at the 15 percent drawdown point. 
I have coined a phrase for this phenomenon: “half of what you think it is.” Just 
remember to keep this in mind when you establish your personal maximum 
allowable drawdown. 
 Median $ Profi t, Median Return
 As with the drawdown, over a full simulation of 2,500 runs, there will be a 
distribution of results. This distribution is used to calculate the median profi t and 
median return. Median $ profi t is simply the fi nal equity minus the initial equity,
after one year’s worth of trades. Over the course of 2,500 runs, a median level can 
be calculated. This is the median $ profi t. The median return is calculated in a similar
fashion, although it is the fi nal equity divided by the initial equity, in order to get it 
into percentage terms. 
 For my personal trading, I have no set goal for median $ profi t. I do like to see 
median returns above 50 percent, especially since I stated earlier that I would 
allow up to 40 percent median drawdown values. It would not be wise of me to 
set the return threshold at 20 percent with a 40 percent drawdown. To keep me 
aware of this relationship between risk and reward, I also calculate the return/
drawdown ratio. 
 Return/Drawdown 
 Of all the statistics produced by the Monte Carlo analysis, I feel this number is the 
most important. It is referred to in fi nancial literature as the Calmar ratio when it is
calculated over a three‐year period. Since I am only simulating one year of perfor-
mance, the simulator result is not exactly a Calmar ratio. The spreadsheet‐produced
number is simply the median annual percentage return divided by the median maxi-
mum percentage drawdown.
 One way to think about this ratio is “it takes Y risk to make X.” In this case, Y is 
the drawdown, and X is the profit return. Obviously, high values of this ratio are 
better. I generally look for return/drawdown ratios above 2.0, although I will 
\n\n=== PAGE 83 ===\n69
DETAILED ANALYSIS
accept lower values in special circumstances. In my experience, I find that ratios 
above 2.0 will usually produce acceptable results in the real world of trading live. 
 Prob > 0
 This gives you the probability, expressed as a percentage, that the system will make 
money in the fi rst year of trading. For example, if Prob > 0 equals 89 percent, that
means you will have an 89 percent chance of showing profi t in the fi rst year. Of 
course, this is all based on your historical test results, so if they are not accurate, this
result will not be either. 
 
■ Summary
 Now that we have discussed the performance report, equity curve, and Monte Carlo 
simulator, we can summarize the uses of all the values and threshold values for ac-
ceptability (Table  7.1 ).
 TABLE 7.1  Important Performance Parameters 
Parameter
Source
Utilized During Threshold
Total net profit
Performance report
Initial review
∼$10K per year per contract
Profit factor
Performance report
Initial review
>1.0 OK, >1.5 ideal
Average trade net profit
Performance report
Initial review
>$50 per contract
Tharp Expectancy
Performance report
Initial review
>0.10
Slippage and
commission
Performance report
Initial review
Discard if $0, otherwise
$5 commission 1–2 ticks 
slippage per round turn
Maximum drawdown
Performance report
Initial review
Should be much smaller than
total net profit
Equity curve slope
Equity curve
Initial review
Ideally rises at 45‐degree angle
Equity curve flat periods Equity curve
Initial review
Short in duration
Equity curve drawdown, 
depth and duration
Equity curve
Initial review
Proportional to overall
curve
Equity curve fuzziness
Equity curve
Initial review
Small is ideal
Risk of ruin
Monte Carlo simulation Detailed review
<10%
Median maximum 
drawdown
Monte Carlo simulation Detailed review
<40%
Median % return
Monte Carlo simulation Detailed review
>40%
Return/drawdown ratio Monte Carlo simulation Detailed review
>2.0
\n\n=== PAGE 84 ===\n\n\n=== PAGE 85 ===\n71
 W
ith the vast multitude of trading system software packages now available, 
designing your own trading system has never been easier. Of course, the 
popularity of packages such as TradeStation, NinjaTrader, and MultiCharts is both 
a blessing and a curse. These simple‐to‐use software programs make turning ideas 
into strategies easier than ever before. What used to take weeks to accomplish in 
Microsoft Excel or in a hardcore programming language (such as C, C++, Visual 
Basic, or, for those older programmers out there, Fortran) now takes minutes or 
even seconds. Life is certainly easier in that respect. 
 The downside to this modern software—besides the fact that many people are 
testing millions of trading ideas every day and will likely discover any “edge” you fi nd, 
eventually rendering it useless—is that trading software makes it too easy. Simply 
look a chart, insert a strategy—possibly one of the many standard strategies that 
come with the software—and you can quickly analyze and optimize to your heart’s 
content. 
 Unfortunately, it is this simplicity that is also the Achilles’ heel of the software. It 
is nearly impossible to create a viable strategy in the simplistic manner that trading 
software products describe. Taking the easy way may indeed give you a strategy with 
a terrifi c‐looking back test, but when the strategy starts running live, all statistics 
turn bad. Perhaps this has happened to you, as it did to me in my earlier development 
days. I was adept at producing back tests that looked like the left side of Figure 5.3, 
only to turn them loose on the live market and experience the right side of the 
equity curve, which inevitably lost money.
Designing and
Developing Systems
g
g
g
g
 C H A P T E R  8   
\n\n=== PAGE 86 ===\n72
DESIGNING AND DEVELOPING SYSTEMS
 Another drawback to the simplicity of ease of use of these “retail” trading soft-
ware packages is that many professional traders can’t or won’t use them. That should 
give pause to every retail trader who thinks the well‐known, commercially available 
package is the best. The fact is that many professionals are typically using far more
sophisticated programming and analysis tools, such as R, Python, Matlab, and so on. 
Or they are developing their own platforms, from the ground up, using open source 
code available on the Internet. I’m not trying to imply that only professional soft-
ware tools are good; rather, I am trying to alert traders to the fact that there are limi-
tations and shortcomings to all trading software. If something does not provide the 
capability you need, either from an analysis, strategy development, or automation
point of view, chances are very good that another, likely more expensive, software 
tool out there does provide it.
 Over the years, I’ve progressed from evaluating systems by hand to analyzing them 
via spreadsheet, to creating strategy evaluators in Fortran (the engineer in me) and 
Visual Basic, to primarily using TradeStation and NinjaTrader today. Along the way, I 
made many mistakes developing trading systems and had to pay the market “tuition” 
in the form of trading losses. Eventually, I fi nally got smart in how I developed trad-
ing systems. Now, I follow a multistep approach, as shown in Figure  8.1 . At each 
point of the process, there is a “gate”—criteria that a strategy must satisfy in order
to advance to the next step. For strategies that fail along the way, small adjustments 
can be made to the strategy when appropriate. In most cases, however, it is better to
place the strategy on the scrap heap and just move on to the next idea. Why? Many 
times, when a strategy doesn’t work the fi rst time through the process, changes to 
it may inadvertently introduce curve fi tting, hindsight bias, or one of a million other
strategy no‐nos. The deceiving part is that the back test will look better—possibly 
a great deal better. But remember that the goal is not to create a superb back test; 
rather, the goal is to create a back test that will refl ect the future performance of 
 FIGURE 8.1
My Strategy Development Process 
Trading Idea
Monte Carlo
Simulation
Incubation
Full-Size, Real-Money Operation
Limited Feasibility
Testing
Walk-Forward Testing
and Optimization
Diversification,
Position Sizing
It takes approx 100−200
trading ideas to yield
1 tradable system
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 86 ===\nx

DESIGNING AND DEVELOPING SYSTEMS

Another drawback to the simplicity of ease of use of these “retail” trading soft-
ware packages is that many professional traders can’t or won't use them. That should
give pause to every retail trader who thinks the well-known, commercially available
package is the best. The fact is that many professionals are typically using far more
sophisticated programming and analysis tools, such as R, Python, Matlab, and so on.
Or they are developing their own platforms, from the ground up, using open source
code available on the Internet. I’m not trying to imply that only professional soft-
ware tools are good; rather, I am trying to alert traders to the fact that there are limi-
tations and shortcomings to all trading software. If something does not provide the
capability you need, either from an analysis, strategy development, or automation
point of view, chances are very good that another, likely more expensive, software
tool out there does provide it.

Over the years, I’ve progressed from evaluating systems by hand to analyzing them
via spreadsheet, to creating strategy evaluators in Fortran (the engineer in me) and
Visual Basic, to primarily using TradeStation and NinjaTrader today, Along the way, I
made many mistakes developing trading systems and had to pay the market “tuition”
in the form of trading losses, Eventually, I finally got smart in how I developed trad-
ing systems. Now, I follow a multistep approach, as shown in Figure 8.1. At each
point of the process, there is a “gate”—criteria that a strategy must satisfy in order
to advance to the next step. For strategies that fail along the way, small adjustments
can be made to the strategy when appropriate. In most cases, however, it is better to
place the strategy on the scrap heap and just move on to the next idea. Why? Many
times, when a strategy doesn’t work the first time through the process, changes to
it may inadvertently introduce curve fitting, hindsight bias, or one of a million other
strategy no-nos. The deceiving part is that the back test will look better—possibly
a great deal better. But remember that the goal is not to create a superb back test;
rather, the goal is to create a back test that will reflect the future performance of

FIGURE 8.1 My Strategy Development Process
\n\n=== PAGE 87 ===\n73
DESIGNING AND DEVELOPING SYSTEMS
the strategy. Waterboarding or otherwise torturing your strategy until it gives great
results is not a successful approach.
 Back in the old days, before I developed the process I now use, I did what most 
other people do: I picked a market, selected a bar interval and time period, put a 
few rules in a strategy, and then optimized. Whatever turned out to be best is what 
I started to trade with live. The magic of the computer, with its ability to quickly do 
millions of iterations, uncovered what I was sure would be riches. Boy, was I ever
disappointed!
 Those early failures led me to a more involved, robust, and ideally trouble‐free 
development process. I can’t take credit for any of the individual concepts—certainly, 
many traders before me long ago developed most of the steps of my process. One
great classic reference on system development is the “bible” of system design: The 
Evaluation and Optimization of Trading Strategies , by Robert Pardo (John Wiley and 
Sons, 1992). I have simply tailored all I have learned and read to create something
that feels right to me, and by and large it has yielded good results in real time.
 That is not to say it is an easy process for strategies to pass. When I fi rst started 
using the basic process I use today (I have enhanced and refi ned it over the years, and
if anything it is more stringent today than it was a few years ago), it probably took 
me about 100 to 200 trading ideas for entries and exits before I found something 
worth trading. With time and experience, that number has dropped signifi cantly, but 
coming up with tradable strategies is not an easy task. 
 Traders that are new to using walk‐forward analysis, Monte Carlo analysis, and 
the like frequently are frustrated by the diffi  culty of discovering a strategy. My an-
swer to that dilemma usually is: “But that is how it is supposed to be!”  Think about 
it for a second—if it were easy to fi nd a strategy, don’t you think others would have 
already found it and exploited it? There are thousands of traders and researchers out 
there every day looking for edges, mining data, and running tests. I guarantee you
that all the easy strategies either no longer work or have been long ago discovered. 
 My good trader friend, who is a Commodity Trading Advisor (CTA), once told 
me that if he fi nds one new strategy a year to trade, he is a happy camper. He should
be, since even one strategy, with proper money management, can make you rich. 
But to get that one strategy per year takes a lot of work. I frequently think of the
strategy development process as a factory. At the receiving door of the factory
are your trading ideas and strategies, the raw material you constantly need to run 
the factory. Your analysis tools, back‐test software, and walk‐forward algorithms are
the machines in the factory. You, of course, are the skilled labor running the machines, 
monitoring the quality of the product. The output usually fi lls a big garbage bin right
outside your factory, unfortunately. But what isn’t thrown away as garbage is pure
gold: your tradable strategy. 
 The factory metaphor is appropriate because strategy development is tough work. 
Factory workers are among the toughest people I know of, and that is how you need 
\n\n=== PAGE 88 ===\n74
DESIGNING AND DEVELOPING SYSTEMS
to be to develop strategies. I am always amazed by educators out there who gloss 
over strategy development. Instead, they focus on such nonsense as getting in touch 
with your feelings or writing everything down in a journal. Don’t get me wrong—
those items have their time and place in trading, but they are no substitute for having 
a strategy with an edge. If you don’t have a good strategy, all the journaling in the 
world will not save you. As an aside, it is ironic, though, that many times “soft” skills 
such as psychology or journaling will be indispensable to a trader with an edge. You
really do need both to succeed.
 Since strategy development is a factory, you need to keep the factory running at 
all times. Here are some tips that I use or have used to keep things humming along: 
 
■ Any time you see a trading idea that intrigues you, write it down. Keep a list of 
ideas you want to test. 
 
■ Look for ideas anywhere. Trading books, magazines, and Internet forums are all 
good sources of raw ideas. I would not recommend taking an idea as presented
and trading it exactly as is, though. I’d look to modify it fi rst, and put your own
unique spin on it. 
 
■ No idea is too silly, too stupid, or too dumb. The only dumb ideas are the ones 
you never test. 
 
■ If you make a big mistake in your coding, test it anyway. I’m a big proponent 
of “accidental” mistakes. Maybe they are really serendipitous creations of your
subconscious. It sounds crazy, I realize, but I have successfully traded, with real
money, more than one of my programming mistakes.
 
■ If things are going bad, try the opposite. Buy when you think you should sell, and 
vice versa. Maybe something interesting will develop from your opposite idea.
 
■ If you are a goal setter, try to test one to fi ve strategies per week, at a minimum. 
It may take six months to a year of rigorous testing, but eventually you’ll fi nd
something. 
 
■ If you run out of ideas, pull up random charts and just stare at them. You can even 
add an indicator or two. After staring a while, but not thinking, walk away from 
those charts and revisit them a few days or a week later. Then start to think: do
you see anything in the relationship of the indicator to the chart or in the chart 
itself? Write down what you see, program it, and test it.
 
■ Find other traders at roughly the same skill level as you. Off er to swap ideas or 
strategies. Take what these traders have, and then build strategies around their
idea. I do this frequently with some of my fellow World Cup Championship of 
Futures Trading winners. 
\n\n=== PAGE 89 ===\n75
DESIGNING AND DEVELOPING SYSTEMS
 
■ Change your criteria. Maybe you are being too restrictive in what you consider 
acceptable. Open the door a bit to strategies that meet most, but not all, of 
your criteria. You can always tighten the criteria once your factory starts pro-
ducing. If you loosen your criteria, don’t necessarily trade the fi rst strategy that 
passes. The point of that really is to give you more experience and confi dence 
in developing “passing” systems. Then, tighten the criteria slowly, and ideally 
by then you’ll be able to improve your systems to meet the tighter challenge. 
Keep repeating this, and eventually you’ll have a strategy that meets your 
original criteria. 
 
■ Isn’t It All Just Optimizing?
 After reading the next few chapters about my process, you might wonder to your-
self, “Isn’t strategy development just all about optimizing?” That is a fair question,
and in a way, all strategy development is. If you start out with 10 million strategies to 
test, chances are good that at least a few will make it through whatever performance
hurdles you put in place, and emerge after incubation as a potential winning strategy.
At that point, a few possibilities emerge regarding the strategy: 
 
■ You have a true edge, and you will be profi table trading it for at least a little while, 
until the edge disappears. 
 
■ You have overoptimized and overfi t the strategy to pass all the tests, but you have 
nothing that will really work in real time (this happens a lot to inexperienced
developers). 
 
■ You have tested so many strategies that sooner or later one was bound to pass all 
your tests. You think this strategy has an edge, but it really doesn’t. It is just ran-
dom chance that you tried this particular strategy. Like a blind squirrel fi nding a 
nut once in a while, you simply got lucky! 
 Obviously, you are looking for strategies that fi t into scenario 1. My process will 
help you avoid strategies in scenario 2 (although you can stretch the guidelines I give 
and end up overoptimizing). Scenario 3 is, in my mind, the scary alternative. With 
this scenario, you think you have an edge, but you really just got incredibly lucky.
You’ll never know for sure if this scenario applies. You could trade successfully for 
years with a lucky strategy, or you could lose money from day 1. You just never know 
what will happen. 
 My advice to avoid scenario 3—fi nding a “lucky” strategy:
 
■ Have a logical basis for your strategy. Think about your entries and exits and how 
they can give you an edge. Use your brain to exploit what you see in the market.
\n\n=== PAGE 90 ===\n76
DESIGNING AND DEVELOPING SYSTEMS
 
■ Keep things as simple as possible. Typically, more rules and conditions lead to a 
greater chance that the strategy will not work in the future.
 
■ Don’t just stick random indicators together until you fi nd something that actually 
works. If you do enough of these tests, you will eventually fi nd something, but it 
is probably just a lucky catch. There are products out there that use this technique,
and they can be very useful if used correctly. Just don’t expect the computer to do 
all your strategy thinking for you. 
 
■ Gently optimize whatever you do.
 Sometimes I liken the strategy development process to fi shing. If you want to 
catch a catfi sh, one way would be to get a huge net, capture thousands of fi sh, and 
then just pick your catfi sh out of the pile of fi sh stuck in the net. That would be com-
parable to randomly testing a million strategies, and fi nding a few seemingly great
ones. A better way might be to think about what catfi sh like, and tailor your bait and
fi shing method to what you think might catch one. This is akin to developing an edge 
and then creating rules to exploit that edge. All things being equal, your chances of 
long‐term success are probably better with the latter method. 
 In the chapters that follow, I detail the process I currently use to design and de-
velop trading systems. Feel free to follow this exact process yourself, or just extract 
bits and pieces that apply to your situation. In either case, your development skills
will improve by following what works for me.
\n\n=== PAGE 91 ===\n Developing a
Strategy 
 PA R T  I I I 
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 91 ===\nprsars

DEVELOPING A
STRATEGY
\n\n=== PAGE 92 ===\n\n\n=== PAGE 93 ===\n79
Strategy
Development–Goals
gy
and Objectives
p
 C H A P T E R   9  
 W
hen you go on a long trip in your car, do you have a map or global positioning
system to guide you? Or do you just “wing it” and hope to fi nd your destina-
tion by reading signs and going on instinct? Most people, of course, would have a 
map. It makes the journey so much easier. And it is the same with developing a trad-
ing system. You should know where you want to end up before you even start. It all 
starts with goals. 
 You’ve probably heard it a million times during your life: if you want to accom-
plish something, you must have goals. Unfortunately, after hearing it so many times, 
many people just list goals to say they did it, or list vague goals that have no way of 
being measured or realized. 
 To develop a good trading system, you absolutely need goals. To do that, I employ 
the SMART technique (Figure  9.1 ). SMART is a little mnemonic trick to assist in 
remembering all the important parts of a goal. Here is how I apply it to trading: 
Specifi c. The goal must be specifi c, not vague. For example, it is not enough to say, 
“I want a trading system that makes me a lot of money” or “I want a trading 
system that has no risk.” Such vague goals, besides being unrealistic, are just too 
general. How will you even know when you reach such a nebulous goal? The 
simple fact is that you won’t know if you ever reach it. 
Measurable. How will you know you’ve created a trading system that meets your
goals unless the goal can be measured? That is the second key to a solid goal.
\n\n=== PAGE 94 ===\n80
STRATEGY DEVELOPMENT—GOALS AND OBJECTIVES
At the end of the development process, you want to have a trading system 
with certain performance metrics, and compare them to the goals you set at 
the outset. It is a very simple concept, but you’d be amazed how many people 
develop goals that aren’t measurable, such as “I want to create a trading system 
that makes my family proud.” An admirable quality in a trading system, to be
sure, but how do you measure this? Maybe if your teenage kids walk alongside
you in a public place, rather than 10 feet in front or behind you, you’ll know 
they are proud of you. But what if you don’t have teenagers?
Attainable. The “A” in SMART stands for attainable. There is absolutely no sense in
saying, “I need to develop a trading system that will provide 500 percent an-
nual return with less than 2 percent maximum drawdown.”  That is not reality. 
You need to strive for a goal that is attainable. Otherwise, you will just become 
disappointed over and over, since you will be unable to create a trading system 
that meets such lofty goals. In the end, most people with unrealistic goals end
up cutting corners by cheating in order to reach their goal. They’ll produce an 
ultra‐optimized back test, curve fi t to the extreme, that shows them reaching 
their unrealistic goals. But as I’ve said before, “If it seems too good to be true, 
it probably is.” 
Relevant. If you set goals for developing a trading system that aren’t relevant to the 
topic at hand, the whole goal exercise will be a waste of time. For example, let’s
say you hate creating trading systems and hate the whole development process. 
Is it even worthwhile for you to pursue creating trading systems? Meaning, is
the whole process even worthwhile to you? If not, you should probably just 
quit right now. To be successful in this fi eld, your heart and mind must be fully
committed. Trust me, there are thousands of professional traders committed 
 FIGURE 9.1
SMART Goals 
Specific
Measurable
Attainable
Relevant
Time bound
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 94 ===\n2
Ss

GOALS AND OBJECTIVES

STRATEGY DEVELOPMENT.

Specific
Measurable
Attainable

Relevant

Time bound

FIGURE 9.1 SMART Goals

At the end of the development process, you want to have a trading system
with certain performance metrics, and compare them to the goals you set at
the outset. It is a very simple concept, but you’d be amazed how many people
develop goals that aren’t measurable, such as “I want to create a trading system
that makes my family proud.” An admirable quality in a trading system, to be
sure, but how do you measure this? Maybe if your teenage kids walk alongside
you in a public place, rather than 10 feet in front or behind you, you'll know
they are proud of you. But what if you don’t have teenagers?

Attainable. The “A” in SMART stands for attainable. There is absolutely no sense in
saying, “I need to develop a trading system that will provide 500 percent an-
nual return with less than 2 percent maximum drawdown.” That is not reality.
You need to strive for a goal that is attainable. Otherwise, you will just become
disappointed over and over, since you will be unable to create a trading system
that meets such lofty goals. In the end, most people with unrealistic goals end
up cutting corners by cheating in order to reach their goal. They'll produce an
ultra-optimized back test, curve fit to the extreme, that shows them reaching
their unrealistic goals. But as I’ve said before, “If it seems too good to be true,
it probably is.”

Relevant. If you set goals for developing a trading system that aren’t relevant to the
topic at hand, the whole goal exercise will be a waste of time. For example, let’s
say you hate creating trading systems and hate the whole development process.
Is it even worthwhile for you to pursue creating trading systems? Meaning, is
the whole process even worthwhile to you? If not, you should probably just
quit right now. To be successful in this field, your heart and mind must be fully
committed. Trust me, there are thousands of professional traders committed
\n\n=== PAGE 95 ===\n81
STRATEGY DEVELOPMENT—GOALS AND OBJECTIVES
to the cause. In a fi ght between committed traders and noncommitted traders,
who do you think will win?
Time bound. Creating a trading system takes time and consumes your free and working 
time, so having a time‐based aspect to the goal is a great idea. It might be a certain 
amount of time you give yourself to create a strategy or a time limit for how long 
you’ll spend evaluating a single idea. The idea will be to keep the process moving 
at all times. As you’ll fi nd out, it gets really diffi  cult to fi nd time and motivation to 
test new strategy ideas, especially when the last 100 ideas all failed. 
 Now that we have the framework for a goal, let’s look at some examples:
“I will create a trading system that meets my performance objectives.” 
 Specifi c? No. Measurable? Not as written. Attainable? Possibly. Relevant? Yes. 
Time bound? No. This kind of goal needs a lot of work.
 “I will create a trading system in six months that meets my performance objectives.” 
 Is this a SMART goal?  Yes and no. The fi rst part is specifi c and measurable (“create 
a trading system in six months”), but the phrase “meets performance objectives” is 
too vague. It can’t be measured either. The beginning of the goal is very attainable—
six months of hard work should yield a decent trading system, with subsequent 
systems developed even more quickly. It is also relevant and time bound. All in all it 
is a good goal, except for the last few words. Let’s try to improve it. 
“I will create a trading system in six months, one that trades the euro currency, returns an aver-
age of 50 percent per year, with a maximum drawdown of 30 percent, a winning percentage 
of 45 percent or higher, and follows all the steps in a well‐defi ned development process.”
 Bingo! That goal meets all the requirements of a SMART goal. You can easily 
compare any system you create to those goals.
 Once you have a SMART goal, and after you attempt to develop a few trading sys-
tems, you might fi nd that what you felt were attainable goals are not that attainable.
This usually hits people when they have annual returns and maximum drawdown
listed in the goal. Sure, 100 percent annual returns is indeed possible (I am living
proof!), but such returns are unrealistic if you also want a 10 percent maximum 
drawdown. Sometimes it is easy to see in advance that a goal is not attainable, but 
other times you’ll learn this only by running through the development process. 
 In such cases, you’ll want to turn your SMART goals into SMARTER goals. All 
that means is that after you try to reach the goal, if need be, you EVALUATE and
REEVALUATE your goals. You adapt them to the situation at hand. This might seem
to some like giving up—if your goal can’t be reached, just lower the goal—but it can 
also improve your chances of succeeding and fi nding a good trading system. If you
fi nd yourself in a situation where your goals can never be met, you can either walk 
away from the process and fi nd a new hobby or career, or you can evaluate and adjust 
your goals to something more relevant and attainable.
\n\n=== PAGE 96 ===\n82
STRATEGY DEVELOPMENT—GOALS AND OBJECTIVES
 Your goal in developing a trading system should be only one or two sentences, 
enough to be SMART. But what about some of your wants and desires for a trading 
system? How do you handle them? They might not easily fi t into your goal, but they
are important nonetheless. Examples of this could be the market you trade, the time 
of day you trade, or any other feature you deem important.
 To accommodate characteristics and traits I want in a trading system, but that are 
not important enough to include in the SMART goal, I create what I call a “wish list.” 
It is as simple as it sounds; it is a checklist of features I want in my trading system. 
 What kinds of items can be in a wish list? Figure  9.2 gives an example of a 
checklist I once created. This was for a mini S&P futures (symbol ES) strategy I 
was trying to develop. They say that the strategy must fi t your personality, and that 
is what I was attempting to do here. By detailing my likes and dislikes, and having 
them written down, it was easy for me to sketch out what my trading system 
should look like. 
 Of course, the longer the list of wishes, the tougher it will be to create a trading 
system. It will be very likely that you will not be able to satisfy all your wishes. 
That’s okay, though—just like everything in life is a compromise, so it is in trading
development. Compromising on your wish list forces you to determine what is 
really important, and then just keep those items. Things you thought were important 
maybe are not all that important. In the end, though, the more wishes you can meet 
with your strategy, the more likely you will trade it with confi dence and resolution.
This confi dence and resolve, sooner or later, will really be of value to you.
 FIGURE 9.2
Sample Trading System “Wish List” 
Like/Dislike
Trades e-minis only
X% annual return, Y% max drawdown
Calmar > Z, Sharpe > W
No overnight exposure
2 or fewer indicators
100% mechanical (no discretionary trading)
More than 2 trades per day
Adds to losing positions
LIKES:
DISLIKES:
Does System Meet This?
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 96 ===\nrl
N

z
=
is)
a
=
a
Z
a
z
s
9
Zz
G
2
a
a
>
a
a
iS)
2
PI

Like/Dislike Does System Meet This?
LIKES:

Trades e-minis only

X% annual return, Y% max drawdown
Calmar > Z, Sharpe > W

No overnight exposure

2 or fewer indicators

400% mechanical (no discretionary trading)
DISLIKES:

More than 2 trades per day

‘Adds to losing positions

FIGURE 9.2 Sample Trading System “Wish List”

Your goal in developing a trading system should be only one or two sentences,
enough to be SMART. But what about some of your wants and desires for a trading
system? How do you handle them? They might not easily fit into your goal, but they
are important nonetheless. Examples of this could be the market you trade, the time
of day you trade, or any other feature you deem important.

To accommodate characteristics and traits I want in a trading system, but that are
not important enough to include in the SMART goal, I create what I call a “wish list.”
It is as simple as it sounds; it is a checklist of features I want in my trading system.

What kinds of items can be in a wish list? Figure 9.2 gives an example of a
checklist I once created. This was for a mini S&P futures (symbol ES) strategy I
was trying to develop. They say that the strategy must fit your personality, and that
is what I was attempting to do here. By detailing my likes and dislikes, and having
them written down, it was easy for me to sketch out what my trading system
should look like.

Of course, the longer the list of wishes, the tougher it will be to create a trading
system. It will be very likely that you will not be able to satisfy all your wishes.
That’s okay, though—just like everything in life is a compromise, so it is in trading
development. Compromising on your wish list forces you to determine what is
really important, and then just keep those items. Things you thought were important
maybe are not all that important. In the end, though, the more wishes you can meet
with your strategy, the more likely you will trade it with confidence and resolution.
This confidence and resolve, sooner or later, will really be of value to you.
\n\n=== PAGE 97 ===\n83
 O
nce you have fi rmly established goals, you are ready to start developing a trad-
ing system. At the end of the process, you’ll have a trading system ready to test. 
To get to that point, however, you fi rst have to address the following topics: 
 
■ Entry rules 
 
■ Exit rules 
 
■ Market selection
 
■ Time frame/bar size
 
■ Programming
 
■ Data considerations
 The important points in each of these areas are discussed in the next two chapters. 
 
■ How Will You Enter a Market? 
 Entry rules are the easiest part of designing a trading system for most people. Think of all 
the trading articles, advertisements, and information you have seen recently. What is usu-
ally the focus? “80 percent winning signals!”  “Unique neural network entry techniques!” 
“Never‐fail indicators!”  “A former rocket scientist develops a foolproof technique for 
fi nding winning stocks!”  The list goes on and on. Most traders are obsessed with getting 
the proper entry. Solve that problem, and everything else is a piece of cake, or so they 
think. The entry lovers love to point to the stock market and say, “Look what would have 
happened if you had bought Microsoft way back when.”  These folks tend to ignore the 
drawdowns during the trade, as long as the entry was correct. 
 Trading Idea
 C H A P T E R   1 0  
\n\n=== PAGE 98 ===\n84
TRADING IDEA
 There is an even more fundamental reason, I believe, for entries being the focus 
of most traders. The time before entry is really the only time you feel in complete 
control. You tell the market, “Mr. Market, you must do this, that, and the other 
before I place a trade to enter. If you do not follow my rules, Mr. Market, I will 
not enter a trade. I am in charge here.” That feels nice, as opposed to the time spent 
in a trade, where many times you hope and pray the market roller coaster will go 
your way!
 Entries, of course, are just one piece of the trading strategy puzzle. For ages, 
people have argued that entries were the most important aspect of a system, or that
entries were the least important part. Dr. Van Tharp did a study years ago with ran-
dom entries, and created successful trading systems by carefully designing the exits.
However, I’m sure some people have also created good systems with random exits. 
 In my experience, the importance of the entry is directly related to the time you 
spend in a trade. If you are a long‐term swing trader, with trades lasting weeks to 
months, you don’t need pinpoint accuracy on the entry. An entry a few days early 
or a few days late will probably not ruin the profi tability of your strategy. If you are
scalping, however, then entry becomes very important. An entry off  by a tick or two 
could turn a winning system into a piece of garbage. Keep that in mind when you
design your system. Know how exact your entry needs to be before you develop it.
 Many people have trouble developing entry ideas, and that is a shame because 
entry ideas are all around us. I have a very good trader friend who uses magazine
covers as part of his decision process. When he sees a few magazine covers talking 
about the upcoming drought or the shortage of physical gold, for example, he knows 
this might be a great time to enter the impacted markets—in the opposite direction,
of course! 
 I provided some sources for entries in an earlier chapter, and I suggest you keep 
the list handy when you run out of inspiration. The key, once you have this list of 
ideas, is to turn them into solid entries that can be back tested. This is where discre-
tion has no place. An algorithmic strategy, by defi nition, consists of an algorithm, a
set of rules that defi ne behavior. If your entry rules cannot be defi ned rigidly, then
creating an algorithmic system is not appropriate.
 Once you have your entry idea, you need to convert it to computer language. If 
you do not know how to program in your trading back‐test software, you will likely 
have to hire someone to do the work for you. Before you do that, it is best to put the 
rule into what is called pseudo code.
 
 This is simply the entry instruction, given in plain 
English. Here is an example: 
 If close this bar is the highest close of last X bars, then buy next bar at market. 
 Converting to a language such as TradeStation’s Easy Language would yield the 
following: 
 If close = highest (close, X) then buy next bar at market.
\n\n=== PAGE 99 ===\n85
TRADING IDEA
 Creating pseudo code is a really important step, since it will help you clarify your 
entry rule, and help you identify any important variables that you want to optimize
(“X” in the preceding example). 
 A few pointers on creating a good entry:
 
■Keep it simple. If you cannot explain the rule in plain English, you will have a tough 
time converting it to computer code, and chances are that what you program may 
not be what you really want. 
 
■Limit the number of input parameters. If you have two or three conditions to your en-
try, it is easy to have 5, 10, or even more parameters you feel should be optimized. 
Remember, though, that for every parameter you optimize, the more you run the 
risk of overfi tting your model. Keep it simple. I personally like to use only 1 or 2 
optimizable parameters for my entries. 
 
■Try to think diff erently. Moving average crossovers have been tested ad nauseum by
professionals and amateurs alike. Try to develop an entry unlike any you’ve ever 
seen—one that very few others might have tried.
 
■Use a single rule at fi rst. If you want an entry with multiple conditions, fi rst start out 
with just one condition. Then, slowly add new conditions only if they signifi cantly
improve performance. You will likely fi nd that many entry conditions you thought
were important really were not. 
 
■ How Will You Exit a Market? 
 Compared to entries, exits are the red‐headed stepchildren of trading strategies. 
Most people, myself included from time to time, pay very little attention to exits. I 
suppose it has to do with the lack of control mentioned earlier, since during a trade 
Mr. Market is in control. It can also be uneasy for many people to think of diff erent 
ways to escape a losing trade, since the whole point of trading is to have money mak-
ing trades, right?
 Exits, simply put, have a huge impact on overall profi tability, and a trader really 
needs to spend a great deal of time preparing proper exits. Just as with entries, there
are many diff erent ways to exit. The most common ways are listed below: 
 
■Stop and reverse.Your entry signal for a new position also becomes your exit signal 
for your existing position. Many people like to be in the market at all times, and
this method accomplishes just that. 
 
■Technical‐based exits. Support/resistance lines, moving averages, candlestick 
patterns, and the like can all be formed into viable exit rules. The key with using 
such rules is to make sure they coordinate with the entry rules. Otherwise, exits
could trigger immediately after entries triggered. 
\n\n=== PAGE 100 ===\n86
TRADING IDEA
 
■Breakeven stops. Many people swear by a breakeven stop, where as soon as practi-
cal, you move the stop‐loss to a breakeven level. This may indeed be useful for
the psyche of discretionary traders or for those obsessed with “winning,” who 
don’t want to see a winning trade turn into a loser. In my experience, though,
breakeven stops always seem to limit profi t potential, since they typically exit on 
a retracement, with the market then resuming its earlier trend. 
 
■Stop‐losses. Some people swear  by stop‐losses, and some people swear 
y
at stop‐losses.
I look at it this way: if a stop‐loss, even one far away from your entry, signifi cantly 
reduces your strategy’s performance, perhaps your entry signal is the real problem. 
Stop‐losses, when coupled with good entries, can help prevent catastrophe. Can you 
imagine trading the mini S&P, without a stop, right before a terrorist attack? True, 
you can get excessive slippage with stop‐losses, but barring a market shutdown, at 
least you can get out, and live to trade another day. Stop‐losses can be dollar based, 
chart based (i.e., exit near support/resistance), or based on parameters such as 
average true range. A simple stop‐loss can become very complicated, indeed.
 
■Profi t targets. The old adage “let your profi ts run” is a tried‐and‐true trading
malapropism. But letting profi ts run is not always the optimum way to trade.
Sometimes it is better to hit a target, profi t based or chart based, and then set up
for the next entry signal. I tend to test with profi t targets, but I also allow for a 
huge profi t on the upper end. Many times, this becomes the best alternative. 
 
■Trailing stops. As the market rises in your favor, you keep a certain percentage of the 
profi t. This really is a moving stop‐loss, but instead of the stop leading to a loss, it 
leads to a smaller profi t. The one problem with trailing stops is that they can have 
many parameters that need optimization. The extra parameters may not be worth 
the eff ort in live trading, although they will certainly make a back test look better. 
 
■ What Markets Will You Trade?
 One of the toughest decisions you will make when designing your system is which 
market or markets to trade. There are really two schools of thought in this area, and
I’ll describe the advantages and disadvantages of each.
 The fi rst method is to design a system for all markets. This would be a “one size fi ts 
all” approach, where the rules for the system never change as you move from market
to market. The parameters, though, could be tuned (or not) for each market. The 
advantage to this approach is that if one single strategy works well on all markets, 
then it likely has a high degree of robustness. This may make the system less vulner-
able to market changes, since the system has likely seen many types of diff erent 
markets across the tested history. The big disadvantage to such an approach is that
development becomes infi nitely more diffi  cult. Designing a system for one market is 
\n\n=== PAGE 101 ===\n87
TRADING IDEA
tough enough. If you now demand that the system work for many markets, you will
struggle to fi nd an acceptable strategy. In such situations, developers typically do one 
of two things: (1) they relax their acceptance criteria, or (2) they test on all markets,
and then select the best 5 to 10 performers to trade. 
 Realize that both of these compromises, while likely necessary to create a multi-
market system, are very bad. Relaxing acceptance criteria will lead you to abandon 
the system early, as you realize with real money that the strategy does not meet your 
initial objectives. Testing on multiple markets, and then “cherry picking” the best 
performers to trade, is just another, albeit sneaky, way of optimizing.
 Creating a strategy for one particular market is the other popular approach. One 
advantage to this method is that it can be customized to the characteristics of the market. 
For example, it is known that currencies tend to trend well, so maybe a breakout‐type 
system is appropriate. Or, for the equity markets, a mean‐reverting strategy with a long 
bias might be best. Another advantage is that, as mentioned earlier, it is always easier 
to create a system for one market than for multiple markets. That doesn’t mean it is a 
better system, though; it just means it is easier to create. The disadvantage to creating a 
single‐market system is that when you create a system knowing the characteristics of the 
market, you are assuming those characteristics will remain the same forever. While that 
may be true, what if it isn’t? How will your trend‐following currency system perform 
when currencies, for whatever reason, become mean‐reverting markets? 
 As you can see, there are valid points for and against each approach to market 
selection. I personally have used both over the years. When I fi nished fi rst or second 
in the World Cup Championship of Futures Trading three straight years, I used a “one 
size fi ts all” system, traded on roughly a half‐dozen to a dozen markets. That worked 
well. Currently, about half of the systems I trade are of this variety. I also like single‐
market systems, not only because they are easier to create, but also because I can 
mix and match them for diversifi cation. In any given year, some of these systems will
underperform, some will be around breakeven, and some will outperform. Having
a multitude of single‐market approaches makes this more manageable, especially 
when strategies have to be retired. 
 
■ What Type of System Do You Want? 
 Whenever I begin looking at a new strategy, I almost always see if it can be made 
into a day‐trading strategy. I defi ne “day trading” as in and out of a trade, or multiple
trades, in a single session. There are some nice benefi ts to such a strategy:
 
■ No overnight risk from unexpected events, since you are fl at.
 
■ Reduced margin requirements, making it easier to trade with large size (although 
most people should not be doing this, as the higher leverage can lead to a greater 
chance of disaster). 
\n\n=== PAGE 102 ===\n88
TRADING IDEA
 
■ A “working job”–type feeling. You fi re up the computer in the morning, trade a 
while, make your daily nut, turn off  the computer, and go home and play with
your kids the rest of the day—a very satisfying way to live. 
 Usually, when I start development, I select short time frame bars (one‐ to fi ve‐
minute), throw in the “set exit on close” statement to exit at the end of the day, and 
jump into development. Nine times out of 10, though, the strategy fails. Regardless of 
the entry idea (trend, countertrend, whatever) and exit scheme (fi xed stops, moving 
stops, breakeven stops, profi t targets, etc.), nothing ever seems to work consistently.
 Inevitably, if I like the strategy idea, I’ll then open up the time frame to 60‐minute 
bars, 240‐minute bars, daily bars. I want to see if my idea has any validity at all. What 
almost always happens? Performance gets better! Maybe the performance still doesn’t 
meet my goals, but the performance on a daily chart is almost always better than on 
a 1‐minute chart. I’ve seen it enough times to realize it is more than a coincidence. The 
question then becomes: why do I see this behavior? Here’s what I have come up with: 
 
■ Number of trades and trading costs. Let’s say I have a daily bar strategy that trades 
1 time per month, or once every 20 bars. That will cost me roughly $25 in trading 
costs. If I go down to 1‐minute bars, the same strategy might trade 10 times per
day (once every 120 bars), leading to $250 in trading costs. That is a huge dif-
ference in costs that must be overcome. Add in the fact that 1‐minute moves are
smaller than daily moves, and it gets even harder.
 
■ There seems to be more randomness in the data as you go to smaller time frame 
bars. Look at a 1‐minute chart of the mini S&P futures (symbol ES) and most
days it is just narrow range noise. It is harder to fi nd the true price path when the 
random noise level is high. Daily bars, as an alternative, seem to have more trends.
Of course, where I see random noise in data could just be due to other biases I 
have fl oating around in my brain.
 
■ Entry and exits become a much more important part of the system when you have 
small stops and targets, as most day‐trading systems are set up to be. So I must 
have really great entries and exits, ones with very good edges. But the better the 
entry, the harder it is to fi nd during development. Plus, miss the entry by a tick,
and you may lose a good percentage of your profi t. If you are swing trading with
daily bars, a tick or two at entry probably won’t mean as much, relative to overall
size of an average trade.
 
■ With tick charts or 1‐ to 5‐minute charts, think about who you are trading against. 
Many times, it is high‐frequency trading fi rms, which probably have better entries
than you and have a speed advantage over you. I feel that the impact of the pros 
is less noticeable at higher time frames, although I realize many pros trade daily
bars, too.
\n\n=== PAGE 103 ===\n89
TRADING IDEA
 
■ With most strategies, as I mentioned before, I fi nd the fewer trades there are, 
the better. This could be due to trading costs, but it also could be due to a very
bad reason: maybe you think you have an edge, but with fewer trades, the sta-
tistical confi dence that you have an edge is a lot lower. Put another way, if I had 
2 strategies that averaged a $50 profi t per trade, and one had 100 trades over the 
past 10 years, and another had 1,000, I’d always pick the 1,000‐trade strategy (so
would every rational person). But the reality is that the 100‐trade strategies are a 
lot easier to fi nd—maybe because they aren’t really edges at all, but just tempo-
rarily lucky strategies?
 I really wish that all my strategies were day‐trading‐type strategies. In actuality, 
probably 9 out of 10 are the exact opposite. My best strategy over the past four or fi ve 
years holds a position for weeks to months—defi nitely not a day‐trading approach. 
 
■ What Time Frame/Bar Size Will You Trade?
 Almost as important as the market you will trade is the time frame(s) you select. For 
most people who look at bar charts, this is simply the length of time for each bar. Of 
course, strategies will perform radically diff erently on diff erent time frames, so it is
best to select a time frame that meets your objectives. Do you want to be in and out
quickly? Maybe a 1‐minute or a tick‐based chart is best. Do you prefer long‐term
swing trading? If so, maybe a daily or even weekly time frame is what you need. The 
point is to select a time frame that matches your interest. 
 One important factor to realize with time frame is that typically shorter time 
frames lead to more trades. If you have small transaction costs, with many quick 
trades, this is terrifi c—just witness the success of all the high‐frequency trading 
fi rms. Even a small edge can yield big profi ts when repeated enough times. But, for 
most of us retail traders, higher transactions costs are just part of the game, making 
quick strategies that much tougher to succeed with.
 When settling on a time size for a bar, an approach that many developers use is 
what I call time frame contraction and dilation. The concept is to test a strategy with
a 10‐minute time frame. If it is successful, the thinking goes, then testing on a 
9‐minute bar and an 11‐minute bar should also be profi table. One minute either
way should not destroy the strategy, and good performance in these contraction and 
dilated periods suggests robustness.
 I personally have had little success with this approach, and I believe there are 
two reasons for it. First, by changing the time length of a bar, over the course of a 
day there are now a diff erent number of bars to evaluate. In the preceding example, 
changing a 10‐minute bar by 1 minute leads to 9 percent more bars or fewer bars. 
This can heavily infl uence the performance of indicators you may employ. The other
issue I have with this approach is that many traders make their decisions on the close
\n\n=== PAGE 104 ===\n90
TRADING IDEA
of a standard period bar. Think of all the people trading off  charts, most of them us-
ing standard time periods of 5, 10, 15, or more minutes. If your system is trading at
a diff erent time, your results can vary widely from the results with a standard (i.e., 
10‐minute) bar.
 Putting my personal objections aside, if you have success with 9‐, 10‐, and 
11‐minute charts, then I’d agree that your system has robustness in it. It would give
me extra confi dence. At the same time, though, if 10‐minute performance was good, 
but 9‐ and 11‐minute performances were awful, I would not necessarily throw out 
the baby with the bathwater. 
 If you decide to test with tick charts, one important consideration with bar size 
and time frame is the amount of historical data available. I discuss the question “how
much data to use” in a later section, but for now realize that many data vendors 
provide only six months of data. This can also be an issue with short time frame bars 
(1‐ to 5‐minute), where orders are triggered intrabar. Tick data are also important
for specialty bars, such as point‐and‐fi gure charts, Kase bars, Renko bars, and so
on. The important point is that if you rely on tick charts or tick data, think carefully
about the implications of limited historical data before you test. 
 One fi nal important consideration involves the daily settlement price and the daily 
last price traded, which is important if you are using daily bars. “What is the problem,” 
you ask, “aren’t closing/settlement prices and the last price traded the same thing?” 
In some markets, yes, and in some markets no. Plus, the meaning of these terms has 
changed with the advent of 24‐hour trading. The gold market is a good example. Back 
in the days when gold was only pit traded (which may easily be part of your historical 
testing period), the market closed at 1:30  p.m . Eastern time, and the last trade of the
day was usually very close, but not necessarily identical to, the exchange published 
settlement price. Now, however, the gold market trades electronically, and it trades 
until 5:00  p.m . Eastern time. Unfortunately, the exchange settlement price is derived
from the trading that occurs from 1:28 to 1:30  p.m. You can imagine how the price at 
1:29 p.m. , the settlement time, can vary widely from the last price traded at 5:00 p.m .
The price action on Wednesday, September 18, 2013, is a great example, as shown in 
Figure  10.1 . A Federal Reserve announcement at 2:00  p.m., after the settlement price 
had been established, roiled the markets. The settlement price and the last traded price 
were dramatically diff erent! 
 Data vendors diff er on how they treat settlement prices and last traded prices. As 
of the time of this writing, TradeStation, for example, uses the exchange settlement 
as the closing price for daily and weekly bars. For X minute bars, the close of the 
last bar of the day is also the last traded price. Kinetick, a provider for NinjaTrader, 
follows the same approach. Another popular data vendor, CQG, however, uses the 
last price traded as its daily bar close. 
 How can this be a problem in your testing? Well, say, for example, you are testing 
with daily bars, and your strategy uses the instruction “sell the bar at close.”   Your strategy 
\n\n=== PAGE 105 ===\n91
TRADING IDEA
dutifully executes the command at 4:59  p.m., and you are fi lled. But later, when the 
exchange settlement price is applied to the data, the strategy will think you were fi lled 
at the settlement price (which is now the daily bar closing price), but you were actually 
fi lled near the last traded price. This is just one of the ways back‐test results can fool you. 
 
■How Will You Program the Strategy? 
 Once you have your basic entry and exit rules thought out; you have selected a mar-
ket, time frame, and bar size to test; and you have obtained the desired amount of 
historical data, it is time to put together your strategy for testing. The question for 
most people at this point is “can I program the strategy myself?”  The answer for a
true do‐it‐yourselfer is undoubtedly “yes.” But if you have never programmed before 
in the language of your strategy‐testing software, you might fi nd this to be a daunting
task. Here are a few tips that might help you out. 
 FIGURE 10.1
 Don’t Assume that Settlement Price = Last Price Traded 
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 105 ===\n[SCZ13 - Daily COMEX L=1273 80 2.60 0.20% B=1273.80 A=1274 00 0126530 Hi=1279 80 Lo=1265.00 V=65 845

wen

4,400.00

wets

4,360.00

+ ry ern
ie an |

"t Mises,

an
yi
I

|
Daily chart shows
settlement price,
which occurred at

'

iy

1:30 PM ac
| 1,330.00
| | | _Last Price 7 =
PM is much higher than |
| af settlement price | ae
| |
hee |
SSrreves Tra nel i | ! aed

1200 1230 13:00 13:30 «14:00 14:30 «1500 15:30 1600 16:30 ‘17-00

Created with TradeStation. ©TradeStation Technologies, Inc. All rights reserved.

FIGURE 10.1 Don’t Assume that Settlement Price = Last Price Traded

dutifully executes the command at 4:59 pM., and you are filled. But later, when the
exchange settlement price is applied to the data, the strategy will think you were filled
at the settlement price (which is now the daily bar closing price), but you were actually
filled near the last traded price. This is just one of the ways back-test results can fool you.

= How Will You Program the Strategy?

Once you have your basic entry and exit rules thought out; you have selected a mar-
ket, time frame, and bar size to test; and you have obtained the desired amount of
historical data, it is time to put together your strategy for testing. The question for
most people at this point is “can I program the strategy myself?” The answer for a
true do-it-yourselfer is undoubtedly “yes.” But if you have never programmed before
in the language of your strategy-testing software, you might find this to be a daunting
task. Here are a few tips that might help you out.

2

VaAdI DNIGVUL
\n\n=== PAGE 106 ===\n92
TRADING IDEA
 If you are completely clueless about computer programming, and you have no 
desire to learn how to do it, your programming tasks are best left in the hands of 
professionals. You can hire an expert at an hourly rate or even a team of experts 
so that no one developer knows all your trading secrets. The drawback here is that 
every time you need a code change, even a small one, you will have to wait for the 
developer to do it, and you’ll likely be charged extra for the privilege. The extra time 
and cost associated with changes, updates, enhancements, and the like can add up 
quickly. If you still feel that a programmer is the right choice, you can fi nd them at
various trading forums, or by contacting your software vendor. 
 An alternative is to partner with a programming expert, ideally someone who 
will be interested in trading the fi nished project. You won’t have to worry about your
partner’s stealing your idea, and the collaboration can lead to far more profi table 
systems. I have done this before, usually as the programming expert, and it is really 
satisfying when it works. The problem is in fi nding people you can trust enough to 
help you. 
 My preferred and recommended approach is that you should program everything 
by yourself. All the trading software packages out there have classes, books, online 
tutorials, and sample strategies to help you develop your skills. By going this route,
you will not have to worry about people stealing your “secret sauce.” Plus, as you 
learn the programming aspect, you will get more familiar with the idiosyncrasies of 
the back‐test engine. This is really important when results look too good to be true. 
Once you know the software and programming well enough, you’ll never have to 
wonder if you have only fooled the back‐test engine but not the real world. 
\n\n=== PAGE 107 ===\n93
 W
ith the entry, exit, market, and time frame/bar length decided, now comes 
one of the most important, most underappreciated, yet least understood as-
pects of testing: market data. People take data for granted, and that can be a big 
mistake. I’ve seen huge diff erences in strategy performance just due to diff erent data 
sources. I’ll make the grand assumption that your data are clean, without bad data 
points, missing data, and so on. Of course, that is not the case at all, practically re-
gardless of vendor. But most people understand that data may have errors; what most 
do not understand is the impact behind the answers to these data‐related questions: 
 
■ How much data should you use? 
 
■ Should you use pit data or electronic data? 
 
■ Should you use continuous contract data?
 
■ Did the advent of electronic trading impact market data? 
 
■ How do you test with foreign exchange (forex) data? 
 Now, before you start testing, is the time to look at all these issues, and make 
some decisions. To go back and retest with diff erent a data structure typically means 
you will be using tainted data, and that is not good. 
■ How Much?
 If you are like me, you’ve probably done the “eyeball” test more than a few times. 
You look at a chart and, knowing your entry and exit criteria, perform a quick test 
of the past few days or weeks of data. After a few trades, if you see a lot of profi t, 
you get excited and venture into more in‐depth testing. If you have losses, you either 
abandon the strategy or tweak it a bit and try again. 
 Let’s Talk about Data 
 C H A P T E R   1 1  
\n\n=== PAGE 108 ===\n94
LET’S TALK ABOUT DATA
 Hopefully, you realize the futility of such a simple test. Not enough trades, not 
enough market conditions, just not enough of anything to make an informed decision—
period. To attain long‐term success, you must look at more data than this. 
 So what is an acceptable amount of data? When I am asked this question, I almost 
always reply, “As much as possible.” More data provides more market conditions—
more bull markets, more bear markets, more fl at markets. It also provides more quiet 
periods and more volatile periods. As you make more trades, and your system remains 
profi table, it becomes less and less likely that the results were due to just chance. 
Think of a coin fl ip. If you fl ip it once, chances are 50/50 that it will be heads. If you 
fl ip a coin 10 times, the chances of heads’ coming up at least once is quite good. Flip 
the coin 100 times, and you are practically guaranteed that heads will appear at least 
once. More fl ips leads to more certainty, just as more trades leads to more confi dence. 
 For daily bar systems, which tend to be swing systems (trades lasting days to 
weeks), I fi nd that 10 years of data is a good compromise. It allows your strategy 
to see many diff erent market conditions and works well with walk‐forward testing
(which requires some initialization time). 
 For intraday or short‐term systems, I also like using 10 years of data. Practical 
considerations, though, such as the introduction of electronic data, may make this
a diffi  cult task. So, in many cases I will use only 5 years of data, realizing that my 
results may not be as robust as a 10‐year tested system. 
 For some people, 5 to 10 years of data is too long a time period to test, or the data 
are not available. In such cases, I recommend the following rules of thumb: for each 
rule and parameter you have in your strategy, have at least 30 to 100 trades. As an 
example, consider a strategy with two entry conditions, and two exit conditions. For 
such a system, I’d like to see 120 to 400 trades. Anything less than this might be ac-
ceptable but also runs the risk of the strategy’s being “matched” or fi tted to the data.
 The drawback to using as much data as possible is that it makes development 
much tougher. Let’s face it—at best, most trading systems out there are probably 
breakeven before commissions and slippage. This means the longer you test it, the 
more likely it is that gross profi ts will revert back to zero. I’m sure you witnessed
this before, when a strategy has fantastic performance in a one‐, three‐, or six‐month 
period, only to give it all back in the next period. So, in the end, ask yourself if you 
want a long‐running positive system, or do you want a great performer over a short 
period of time? The former is much tougher to fi nd, and the latter is much more
likely to lead to real‐time losses.
 
■ Pit or Electronic Data? 
 Back in the old days of pit trading, knowing what data to use was easy—just use the 
pit data because that was all there was! Today, with electronic data taking over, there 
are multiple options:
\n\n=== PAGE 109 ===\n95
LET’S TALK ABOUT DATA
 
■ Pit data only 
 
■ Electronic data only
 
■ Pit and electronic data together 
 
■ Data during traditional pit times only
 
■ Data during all hours 
 
■ Data during day session/evening session
 The choice for data going forward might be easy—electronic data are the best 
because that is where the volume currently is, but what do you do when you are 
historically testing a strategy? 
 I’ll give you a simple example to highlight the dilemma. Let’s say you are trading 
gold, and you want to use 20 years (excellent choice!) of data, with 60‐minute bars.
Twenty years ago, the pit was the only data source, so you have to use that. In a daily 
pit session, there were probably six to eight bars roughly (since pit trading hours
over the years changed, the number of 60‐minute bars per day will change, too). 
For your strategy, let’s say you use a 14‐period moving average. This will typically 
represent two trading days. 
 Now, fast‐forward to today’s electronic markets. Today’s markets trade for roughly 
23 hours per day. If you still use a 14‐period moving average, that will only equate
to a half trading day, instead of the previous two trading days. Do you think that can 
radically infl uence your historical tests? It sure can!
 How do you handle this? Typically, I rely heavily on daily data, especially the daily 
settlement prices. Pit and electronic settlements are identical. I do not like using
daily highs and lows, since the average range between pit high and low will usually
be less than electronic day high and low. If this sounds confusing, just think of an 
overnight price shock that lasts for an hour before reverting to the previous price 
level. In the old pit days, such a shock would never have shown up in the data, since 
it happened overnight. For electronic data, though, the daily high would include this 
price shock. Therefore, your strategy may perform quite a bit diff erently in the old 
days versus today’s market.
 One trick that helps make all the data the same is to select a standard daily ses-
sion time, and apply it to your complete historical database. For currencies, for 
example, the pit used to be open from 8:20  a.m. to 3:00 p.m. Eastern time. To 
keep this time intact in the electronic era, I simply create a special “currency pit” 
session from 8:20 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. for all the historical data. Then all my data are
consistent. 
 With all the available options with data, I highly recommend you take time and 
think about the data you are using. Making sure it is consistent throughout your test 
history is defi nitely the best way to test. It may not be that easy to create those data, 
though. 
\n\n=== PAGE 110 ===\n96
LET’S TALK ABOUT DATA
 
■ Continuous Contracts 
 One concept that stymies most junior system developers is the use of continuous 
contracts in futures market testing. Continuous contracts are needed because each
futures contract has a limited life, and continuous contracts create a never‐ending 
data stream. The concept is simple—just artifi cially stitch together expiring futures 
contracts to create one continuous data stream—but the implementation path is
peppered with pitfalls, just waiting to catch the unwary. I’ll discuss these pitfalls for
the three major techniques of futures data selection. 
 The purest way to test with futures data is just to use the raw contract data. Then 
you don’t have to worry about continuous contracts at all. The problem is that most 
trading software is not set up to easily accomplish this. Let’s say, for example, that
you want to test a strategy on the euro currency. If you were testing in 2013, from 
January 1 to approximately March 15, you would use the March contract, 6EH13. 
From March 15 to June 15, you’d use the June contract, 6EM13. In this way, you’d 
progress through all the years of your data. But you’d have some problems in test-
ing this way. First, you’d have to put in logic to (1) determine the proper end date 
for each contract (i.e., before fi rst notice day or last trading day, whichever comes 
fi rst) and (2) “roll over” the current position from the current contract to the new 
contract. Certainly, this could be accomplished, but it would require some detailed 
programming. The bigger issue is if you wanted to optimize the strategy over all 
these contracts. Most trading software requires an optimization on one chart of data. 
With multiple contracts of data, you cannot optimize without doing it manually, a 
tedious and painstaking process. 
 To get around these limitations of testing with the individual contracts, many peo-
ple splice the contract data together in a continuous contract. There are two primary 
(and numerous less popular) ways to create a continuous contract, and, of course,
both have some serious pitfalls. The fi rst type of continuous contract is a nonadjusted
continuous contract. Using the preceding example, on March 15 the contract data 
would switch from March to June. The nice thing about this method is that the origi-
nal data are preserved—no adjustments have been made to the data. The pitfall with 
these data is that, at rollover, rarely if ever will the two contracts be the exact same 
price. Frequently, the front month will have a signifi cant discount or premium to the 
next month. An example of this is shown in Figure  11.1 . Using these data as is will
create false signals and false profi ts and losses. Assume you are long November soy-
beans, and then you roll over to the May soybeans. With a spread of 38 points, with
an unadjusted continuous contract, a trading strategy will think that gap is real and 
that you profi ted from it. The reality, though, is that you would not actually benefi t
from the gap. The gap exists only because the contract month has changed. 
 Many people get around this artifi cial gap by using what is called a back‐adjusted 
contract. With this type of contract, the gaps are subtracted out, and all previous data 
\n\n=== PAGE 111 ===\n97
LET’S TALK ABOUT DATA
are adjusted appropriately. An example would be as follows: Suppose on March 15, 
June euro closes at 1.3512, and March euro closes at 1.3516, a diff erence of .0004. 
To remove this gap of .0004, all data from March and before must have .0004 added 
to it. This will remove the gap from all data, and provide a nice continuous data 
stream. It seems like the ideal solution. 
 Of course, no method is perfect, and this technique has a couple of problems, one 
of which practically no one talks about, at least that I’ve ever seen. The fi rst problem
is that constantly accounting for gaps at every rollover leads to a situation where the 
historical data actually become negative. An example of this is shown in Figure  11.2 . 
Clearly, crude oil never had a negative price, but that is what the continuous contract 
shows and what your strategy will test with. Although the continuous data may seem 
strange (don’t show your friends your “Holy Grail” trading system with these market
data, since they’ll think you are crazy for testing with negative prices!), the results 
are accurate, provided you do not fall victim to the second pitfall. 
 The second pitfall with continuous back‐adjusted contracts is also the issue most 
likely to lead to invalid trading results. In a nutshell, you cannot have any indicators
 FIGURE 11.1
 Contract Prices Will Be Diff erent for Diff erent Months 
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 111 ===\n|SK14 - Daily CBOT L=1274 4/8 -2.4/8 -0.20% B=1274 4/8 A=1274 6/8 O=1276 4/8 Hi=1280 2/8 Lo=1271 4/8 V=4,9;

tt ¢ 1328
a gh he i a a ci

t De We : t ! : ! 1200

‘Spread - Di case of Datat,Close baa 10000000.... 38.00

{
| +-—_}+—_ |} ft fam
|

24 4 l|OU8SCOSSCOtstsi« A SCi:sti‘a)SCOGCSDCi‘“CMtCKSC«iD

Created wih TradeStation. TradeStation Tectnologes, In Al ngs reserved.

FIGURE 11.1 Contract Prices Will Be Different for Different Months

are adjusted appropriately. An example would be as follows: Suppose on March 15,
June euro closes at 1.3512, and March euro closes at 1.3516, a difference of .0004.
To remove this gap of .0004, all data from March and before must have .0004 added
to it. This will remove the gap from all data, and provide a nice continuous data
stream. It seems like the ideal solution.

Of course, no method is perfect, and this technique has a couple of problems, one
of which practically no one talks about, at least that I’ve ever seen. The first problem
is that constantly accounting for gaps at every rollover leads to a situation where the
historical data actually become negative. An example of this is shown in Figure 11.2.
Clearly, crude oil never had a negative price, but that is what the continuous contract
shows and what your strategy will test with. Although the continuous data may seem
strange (don’t show your friends your “Holy Grail” trading system with these market
data, since they'll think you are crazy for testing with negative prices!), the results
are accurate, provided you do not fall victim to the second pitfall.

The second pitfall with continuous back-adjusted contracts is also the issue most
likely to lead to invalid trading results. In a nutshell, you cannot have any indicators

Ry
a

VLVC LNOSY NIVLS.LAT
\n\n=== PAGE 112 ===\n98
LET’S TALK ABOUT DATA
that divide or multiply prices when you use back‐adjusted contracts. An example
best shows the point: 
 Suppose you have a strategy that uses the percentage change in day‐to‐day close, 
close i /close  i −1 . On March 10, you are using the March contract, and the close is 
1.3500. The previous day close is 1.3420. The percentage change calculation is then 
1.3500/1.3420 = 1.00596. 
 Fast‐forward to March 20, when the June contract is the front contract. When 
you performed the continuous contract back adjusting, .0030 was added to it. 
This is an extreme amount for rollover adjustment, just to prove my point. Thus, 
now the March 10 close is 1.353, the previous day close is 1.345, and the ratio 
is now 1.353/1.345 = 1.00595. The ratio for the same date has changed! Plus, 
it will change again at every rollover in the future. This means that when you 
back test a strategy with ratios, your back‐test signals will be diff erent than real‐
time signals. The diff erence may not be much, but it will certainly be there. The 
question will then be “can you rely on performance histories that you know will 
change in the future?” 
 If this seems like a subtle distinction, just imagine what happens when the price 
data approach zero, the other known pitfall on back‐adjusted data. Dividing by zero 
or a number close to zero will lead to a huge result! Clearly, that would never happen
in real time—unless, of course, the actual price of the instrument in question went 
to zero. Just do not count on that ever happening!
 The only way around this pitfall is to take special care that division or multi-
plication is not used with price data in back‐adjusted continuous contracts. Both 
 FIGURE 11.2
 Back‐Adjusted Continuous Contracts Can Have Negative Prices
Soybean prices were not
really less than 0,
although a back-adjusted
continuous contract says
it was!
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 112 ===\n\o
eo

LET’S TALK ABOUT DATA

[5S PIO]. Woeky COOT U> 1000 540 OA0H BeTGTO ACTSTD O-O HO Les Ve

wy Wha

*\\ Soybean prices were not

really less than 0,
/ although a back-adjusted
“continuous contract says
twas! me

e u 7 %e

Created with TradeStation, ©TradeStation Technologies, Ino. Al rights reserved

FIGURE 11.2 Back-Adjusted Continuous Contracts Can Have Negative Prices

that divide or multiply prices when you use back-adjusted contracts. An example
best shows the point:

Suppose you have a strategy that uses the percentage change in day-to-day close,
close;/close ; -;. On March 10, you are using the March contract, and the close is
1.3500. The previous day close is 1.3420.The percentage change calculation is then
1.3500/1.3420 = 1.00596.

Fast-forward to March 20, when the June contract is the front contract. When
you performed the continuous contract back adjusting, .0030 was added to it.
This is an extreme amount for rollover adjustment, just to prove my point. Thus,
now the March 10 close is 1.353, the previous day close is 1.345, and the ratio
is now 1.353/1.345 = 1.00595. The ratio for the same date has changed! Plus,
it will change again at every rollover in the future. This means that when you
back test a strategy with ratios, your back-test signals will be different than real-
time signals. The difference may not be much, but it will certainly be there. The
question will then be “can you rely on performance histories that you know will
change in the future?”

If this seems like a subtle distinction, just imagine what happens when the price
data approach zero, the other known pitfall on back-adjusted data. Dividing by zero
or anumber close to zero will lead to a huge result! Clearly, that would never happen
in real time—unless, of course, the actual price of the instrument in question went
to zero. Just do not count on that ever happening!

The only way around this pitfall is to take special care that division or multi-
plication is not used with price data in back-adjusted continuous contracts. Both
\n\n=== PAGE 113 ===\n99
LET’S TALK ABOUT DATA
ratios of prices and percentage changes in prices are no‐nos. If you choose not 
to follow this rule, do not be surprised when (1) your historical performance 
results change over time and (2) that your historical results and future results do 
not match. 
 
■The Impact of Electronic Markets 
 Many trading system developers test strategies only on electronic data. They ignore 
any pit data, so their strategies typically only test for the past few years. Their rea-
soning is that the markets fundamentally changed when electronic markets came 
on the scene, so strategies that work now don’t necessarily have to work in the 
long‐forgotten pit era. To that argument, I both agree and disagree. 
 Electronic markets have undoubtedly changed the futures markets. Without a pit 
full of traders, the whole dynamic of pricing has been altered. In fact, many former 
pit traders, who made a very good living while on the fl oor, struggled mightily when
they moved to electronic trading. Most were trying to trade as they did on the fl oor,
and the market had changed enough that those techniques were no longer profi table.
Add in today’s high‐frequency trading fi rms, and the short‐term market is certainly 
diff erent than the old pit trading days.
 On a longer‐term scale, though, almost all commodities are dictated by the law 
of supply and demand. The venue for trading—electronic, pit, or a combination of 
the two—doesn’t have a long‐term impact. It doesn’t make sense to think that high‐
frequency traders, who are in a trade for only a few seconds, have an impact on the 
price two or three months from now. 
 With those contrasting views in mind, I still use pit‐traded data, and the history 
they provide, for my longer‐term swing‐trading development. That way, my strategy
is able to experience more market conditions. If a strategy I develop for soybeans
works well in the 1990s, 2000s, and 2010s, I am more confi dent and impressed 
with the system. Some people would even go back to the 1970s and 1980s! For
shorter‐term systems, especially intraday ones, using only the electronic data may
make sense. If it also works on pit data, that is great, but I probably would not make
it a requirement. 
 
■Testing with Forex Data 
 If you are testing a forex system, there are two major concerns you need to be aware 
of. The fi rst issue is that not all forex data are the same. In fact, since the forex is
decentralized, there is no offi  cial price stream like there is for futures markets. That
means that each broker will have its own unique price data set. Of course, if you back 
test with the same data source that you will use going forward, then there is no issue. 
\n\n=== PAGE 114 ===\n100
LET’S TALK ABOUT DATA
But if you test with data from broker A, and then want to trade it live with broker B, 
the system will now have diff erent data to deal with. In that case, you can basically
toss all your back tests out the window, as they are no longer valid. Depending on the
data diff erences, your results might be better, and they might be worse. The point is, 
though, that you have invalidated all your testing by changing data sources. 
 The second issue with testing forex data is in the types of orders you use. If you 
are testing your system with forex data, you really need to be careful with how your 
strategy places orders. Because of the issue I show later, I only use market orders
for entry and exits. My forex strategies never have limit or stop orders in them. Of 
course, I always add the spread cost into the fi nal profi t/loss on each trade, but by
using market orders, I never have to worry about “phantom” fi lls. 
 What is the pitfall to using limit and/or stop orders with forex data? In futures 
markets, there is one price data stream, which always represents the traded price. 
With forex, however, there is both a bid data stream and an ask data stream. The dif-
ference between these two data streams is the current spread, which is typically a
few pips. By defi nition, you can only buy at the ask and sell at the bid.
 The problem with testing a trading strategy with forex data is that the data stream 
shown on the chart is typically the bid data stream. Although you could alternatively
show the ask data stream (if available), most trading software back‐test engines can
use only one to calculate trade results. If your trading software can calculate fi lls us-
ing bid and ask data simultaneously, you may not encounter this issue. For example,
non‐object‐oriented TradeStation can only test with bid  or ask data. MultiCharts, on
r
the other hand, can test with both bid  and ask data. It is a good idea to check your
d
software fi rst, though, before assuming this is not a potential issue for you. If it is a
potential issue for you, here is an example of how it could be a problem: 
 Suppose you are trading the EURUSD forex pair. The current price is 
1.3502/1.3505 (I am using an unrealistically high three‐pip spread for this example,
but the principle holds for even smaller spreads). That means the bid is at 1.3502, 
and the ask is at 1.3505. Remember, you can buy at the ask but not below, and you 
can sell at the bid but not above. Let’s also assume your trading software shows you
the bid data, so currently it shows 1.3502. 
 For this example, your strategy places an order to buy at 1.3500. Shortly after 
your order, the price drops to 1.3499/1.3502. Since the price on the chart is now 
1.3499, and your buy price is 1.3500, the software strategy engine thinks you were 
fi lled at 1.3500. It thinks you are currently long, but the ask price only hit 1.3502, 
so in real life you would never be fi lled. 
 “Big deal!” you might say. “How often can this possibly happen?”  Well, it will never 
happen for losing trades, since for losers the price will keep falling and you will get 
fi lled in real life, just as your back‐test engine got fi lled. But for winning trades that 
turn profi table before the ask price hits 1.3500, you will never get fi lled. Depending 
on your trading methodology, it could lead to a huge discrepancy between back‐test 
\n\n=== PAGE 115 ===\n101
LET’S TALK ABOUT DATA
engine results and real‐world results. At the very least, your back‐test report will al-
ways be on the optimistic side. Since you use that information to develop your strategy,
s
you could be basing your trading decisions on some very suspect results. Although the 
example I presented is for limit orders, the same type of situation occurs with stop 
orders. You will have stops fi lled at prices that never show up on the bid data chart.
 To get around this issue, you cannot just add slippage to each trade like you can 
with futures. This is because the bid/ask problem is not a situation of slightly worse
fi lls—it is a case of fi lls or no fi lls. Or your software platform may off er advanced 
order techniques and methods (TradeStation refers to the method as “price series 
providers”). The key is to be able to back test the same way you trade live. That is 
precisely why I use market orders for all my forex strategies. Since I use orders 
such as “sell next bar at market,” I can have some losses that are much bigger than a
stop‐loss would be, and that is the big disadvantage of market orders. Just imagine, 
for example, how much the price could change in a fi ve‐minute bar around a Federal
Reserve announcement. In the long run, though, I know market orders will always 
be fi lled, and they back test the same, after accounting for the spread, as they trade in
live accounts. Therefore, I have found this situation to be acceptable, since it provides
back‐test results that match real market fi lls fairly well. 
 
■ Summary
 As you can see, the issues behind market data are much more complex than the trad-
ing software leads you to believe. It is critical that you put in the time and eff ort up
front to examine and understand the market data you are using. Utilizing the wrong 
data, or using the right data incorrectly, can lead to completely bogus test results. In 
most cases, unfortunately, you will not even realize there is an issue at all. I recom-
mend that you spend as much time in the beginning reviewing your market data as 
you do in formulating your entry and exit criteria. 
\n\n=== PAGE 116 ===\n\n\n=== PAGE 117 ===\n103
 A
t this point, I’ll assume you have the strategy coded, debugged, and ready to 
test. Unfortunately, when they get to this step, many traders will just test the 
strategy over the whole market history that they are interested in and see how prof-
itable the strategy is. Some will go a step beyond this and actually run thousands or 
even millions of optimization iterations as part of this. What better way to see how 
good strategy can be than by running it to its extreme? 
 As you may have guessed, I am fi rmly against running these kinds of comprehen-
sive tests. These tests may lead to a few great‐looking optimized back tests but will 
almost always fail in real‐time trading. Since successful real‐time trading is the goal, 
shouldn’t that be our success criteria, rather than a nice‐looking back test?
 The other major problem with testing on all the data is that once you test the data, 
you “burn” it. This means that any subsequent retests will be just a bit more curve fi t, 
a bit more optimized. Think about it: You run strategy A over all your data. It looks 
good, but not great. You make a few minor tweaks and rule changes to your strategy 
and then test the new strategy B. Now, it yields much better results. You are ecstatic. 
But do you realize you just optimized? No, you did not optimize in the sense of 
running strategy A with optimized parameters, which is how most trading software 
describes optimization. But you certainly did optimize, as you tested both strategy 
A and strategy B, and picked the best one. Even though in this case strategy B has 
a better back test than strategy A, I’d believe the results of strategy A more (unless 
strategy B is much, much better than A), since A was run with untouched data.
 Theoretically, you should run a strategy on a set of data one time, and one time 
only. If it works, great, but if it doesn’t work, you should just move on to the next 
data set or instrument. That original data are tainted by your testing, to a degree. This 
is the point where theory and practice deviate. In actual practice, you will eventually 
test multiple strategies over the same data, maybe not right away, but eventually it 
 Limited Testing
 C H A P T E R   1 2  
\n\n=== PAGE 118 ===\n104
LIMITED TESTING
is inevitable. That is why you need to be careful. In my testing, I like to follow the
teachings of Don Juan described in the book Journey to Itxlan: The Lessons of Don Juan
 
(Simon & Schuster, 1972): “He taps it lightly, stays for as long as he needs to, and 
then swiftly moves away leaving hardly a mark.” 
 If you treat the data as fragile, you are more likely to avoid this issue. Treat your 
data with utmost care! 
 Since testing with all the data is a no‐no, what is a reasonable and acceptable way to 
test a strategy? On one hand, you want to see if the core idea you developed has any 
merit to it; but on the other hand, you want the ability to add or change rules to the strat-
egy, without falling victim to curve fi tting or hindsight bias. Also, you want to leave as 
much data in your dataset untouched as possible, since this will create a better and more 
realistic walk‐forward test (walk‐forward testing will be discussed in the next chapter). 
 Given all these competing forces, I have found it best to do preliminary testing on 
a chunk of historical data, but not the whole data set. For example, if I have 10 years 
of data for my full test, I will do the preliminary limited testing described below on
one or two years’ worth of data. I try to use as little as possible, while still getting 
enough trades to be statistically meaningful. I will try to take the two years of data at 
random, not using the same data all the time or favoring any particular years.
 Some traders advocate testing fi rst on the “most interesting” data. For most com-
modities and futures, that would be the 2007–2009 time frame, when the world 
markets nearly collapsed. Their point is that if a system performs badly at this time,
it will likely perform poorly at the next market shock. While I understand their ap-
proach, I respectfully disagree. I would try to avoid preliminary testing during the 
fi nancial crisis, since it may lead me to a system that performs well only during se-
vere shocks and panics. While a system such as this might be nice at those times, I’d 
fear that the system would lose a lot more during the more prevalent “normal” times.
 If I take my two‐year chunk of data and adhere to the following process, I’ll end 
up fairly certain whether my idea has any merit. The objective at the limited testing 
phase isn’t to determine if a system is tradable; rather, it is used as a hurdle to see if 
the trading system has any potential. Frequently, I have trading strategies that survive 
the limited two‐year test but later fail the more rigorous tests. Only infrequently
does the reverse occur, where I dismiss a strategy because of the limited results, and
it turns out later to be a fantastic strategy. 
 
■ Entry Testing
 The fi rst thing I usually want to know when testing a trading system is whether the 
entry has any usefulness. Many times, what looks like a good entry appears that way
only because of the exits. Frequently it is diffi  cult to know the true impact of entries
when tested as a whole system. 
\n\n=== PAGE 119 ===\n105
LIMITED TESTING
 When I evaluate entries by themselves, I typically perform the analysis three ways: 
 
■ Fixed‐stop and target exit
 
■ Fixed‐bar exit 
 
■ Random exit 
 Fixed‐Stop and Target Exit 
 For the fi xed‐stop and target exit test, I simply choose a set stop‐loss and profi t tar-
get that is appropriate for the instrument and time frame I am trading. For a swing‐
type system lasting a few days, $500 to $1,500 is a reasonable amount for a stop‐loss. 
Similarly, I set an appropriate profi t target. All things being equal, if you set the stop 
and target to the same dollar amount, before commissions and slippage you should 
prevail on 50 percent of your trades, assuming that your entry is no better than ran-
dom. Using set dollar amounts for stop and profi t, I simply create a strategy with my
entry signal, set stop-loss, and set profi t target.
 Fixed‐Bar Exit
 For the fi xed‐bar exit test, I create an exit condition that closes the trade after X 
number of bars pass. The idea behind this is that most good trades show profi t right
away and could be exited with a profi t almost immediately. If your entries don’t 
show profi t until 10 or more bars, for example, perhaps your entry is too early and
should be delayed. This test really helps to check if the entry signal gets you going in
the correct direction. 
 Random Exit 
 For the random exit test, I typically use this as part of the “monkey test” process, 
described later. However, sometimes I use it right at the beginning of testing. The
concept is based on eliminating the impact of any exit and just seeing the ability of 
the entry to generate winning trades. If an entry is always profi table with a randomly 
generated exit, then chances are much better that there is an edge there.
 Entry Evaluation Criteria
 For each of the three test techniques just described, there are a few ways to look 
at and analyze the results. Winning percentage, for example, is a very valid way to 
compare entries. If you test without slippage and commissions, your entry should
be able to win more than 50 percent of the time, since that is what a random entry 
would give you. In my experience, I have found that 52 to 60 percent is achievable, 
and values that high suggest a worthwhile entry technique is present. 
\n\n=== PAGE 120 ===\n106
LIMITED TESTING
 The counterargument to using winning percentage is that, while it is nice to be 
right, it is even better to make money. A 60 percent winning percentage might make 
less money than a 40 percent winning percentage, especially if the entry is a trend‐
following entry. Trend‐following entries, such as breakouts and moving average 
crossovers, are generally much lower winning percentage systems. They get their re-
venge on high‐win‐percentage systems by yielding few big winners and many small 
losers, with the win amount easily outpacing the loss amount. In these situations, 
therefore, the average profi t per trade becomes useful. 
 Since both winning percentage and average profi t give meaningful information, I 
use them both. Since this is preliminary testing, I do not worry about drawdown or
any other metric. All I want to know at this point is if my entry seems to have any 
edge. These two metrics can help tell me that. 
 You may be wondering about optimization at this point. Should you use it? I will, 
but when I look at the results, I will not just look at the best iterations. Instead, I 
look at all of them. For example, let’s say I run 100 iterations, with various values
for my entry input parameters. If only a handful of iterations are profi table or have 
a winning percentage above 50 percent, I will likely discard that system. But, if 
70 percent or more of the iterations are favorable, then I will consider the entry as
having successfully passed the test.
 
■ Exit Testing
 In a similar fashion to entry testing, there are a few diff erent ways to test an exit. 
Where it gets complicated is when the exit is tied to the entry is some fashion. An 
example of this might be using support lines for entries, and resistance lines for exits. 
It is hard to separate the two. In these cases, I might choose not to even test exits by 
themselves, and rather proceed to a complete system test, discussed later. 
 When I do evaluate exits by themselves, I typically perform the analysis two ways: 
 
■ Similar‐approach entry 
 
■ Random entry 
 Similar‐Approach Entry 
 The core idea behind testing exits by themselves is to see if they can help give you 
an edge. Most people see edges as being applicable only when you enter, but really, 
exits have just as much, if not more, impact on the bottom line. A carefully designed 
exit, it has been shown, can make even bad entry systems profi table! 
 Since I will be testing the actual entry with the actual exit a bit later, at this point 
I want to see how the exit performs. To do this, I create an entry similar to the entry 
I want to use. This usually falls in one of two primary categories: trend following and 
\n\n=== PAGE 121 ===\n107
LIMITED TESTING
countertrend following. Since I know what type of entry I have, I just create a generic 
one similar to it. For a trend‐following approach, for example, I may just employ 
an X‐bar breakout strategy. For a countertrend strategy, maybe I will use a relative
strength index (RSI)‐based entry. In either case, I create an entry that is comparable 
to my actual entry. Then I test it with my exit strategy. A robust exit strategy that is 
profi table to my similar‐approach entries will likely also be profi table with my actual 
entry. This is a way to test an exit without involving the entry.
 Random Entry 
 Discussed in a later section, if you have an exit strategy that works well with a ran-
dom entry, you might have a really good system when you combine it with a solid
entry technique. I do not use this approach as much as I used to, but occasionally I do
like to see how a new exit technique works with random, no‐edge entries. 
 
■ Exit Evaluation Criteria
 When I test exits by themselves, I generally do not look at winning percentages at 
all, and just focus on overall profi tability. In addition, I will use maximum favorable
excursion (MFE) and maximum adverse excursion (MAE) as measurement criteria.
With these metrics, the idea is that you do not want the exit to get you into too 
much trouble (adverse excursion), and you do not want it to give back too much of 
the potential profi t (found by comparing actual profi t to the favorable excursion).
The trouble with these metrics, I have found, is that it becomes too easy to design
just to these values, and in my experience that doesn’t necessarily lead to better
systems. They are good, though, to see the potential of your system.
 
■ Core System Testing 
 Although there are benefi ts to testing the entry and exit signals by themselves (one 
being that you can always fi le away good entries and exits for use with another
system), the interaction of entries and exits, as previously mentioned, is usually quite 
important. Regardless of whether I test entries and exits by themselves, I always test 
the complete core system during the preliminary phase.
 My objective in testing the whole system is to see whether, on a limited history 
of data, the strategy performs well. The main criteria I use at this point is net profi t, 
and I like to see profi table results over a wide range of variables and over most of 
the iterations. For example, if I have a simple breakout with 10 possible values of 
the breakout amount, and 10 stop‐loss/profi t values, that creates 10 × 10 = 100 
iterations. I would expect a good strategy to be profi table over 70 or more of these 
\n\n=== PAGE 122 ===\n108
LIMITED TESTING
iterations on the small data set. If I do see this type of behavior, I generally will run
the monkey test shown later, and then go on to more in‐depth testing. 
 Most of the time, the number of profi table iterations is on the order of 30 to 
70 percent of total cases. This puts me in a “no man’s land”—obviously, the strategy 
is not good enough as is, but there may be something there to work with. In situa-
tions like this, I may decide to add a rule, a fi lter, or otherwise change the entry and
exit. Unfortunately, there is no set protocol for doing this. Many times, I’ll use extra
rules or conditions that I have had previous success with. Once I make some minor 
changes, I reevaluate my sample results.
 The downside to this iterative process of modifying the rules is that you run 
the risk of fi tting the system to the historical data. One or two modifi cations 
may be okay, but if you spend a lot of time modifying your strategy to get better 
results, you may very well fall into the “create a great‐looking back test, but the 
real world performance suff ers”–type scenario. Most times, if the fi rst or second 
modifi cation doesn’t dramatically improve things, then the strategy is best left for 
the scrap heap. 
 As I have stated, when I do the preliminary testing with limited optimization, 
I like to see 70 percent or higher of cases with net profi t, and I will work with 
the 30 to 70 percent cases a bit to see if I can improve them. But, what about 
strategies that are just awful, with less than 30 percent of iterations generating 
any profi t? In these cases I use the George Costanza approach: if everything I 
built is bad, then the opposite must be good! I will reverse the signals and buy 
when I was selling, and vice versa. Depending on the strategy logic, this doesn’t 
always produce the exact opposite result, but in many cases it is close. Without a 
doubt, though, this opposite eff ect is really apparent only before commissions and 
slippage are added in. Why is that? Well, take a trading system that has −$50 aver-
age profi t per trade, after $30 commissions and slippage. That might be a decent 
candidate for an opposite approach, since many people will assume that it would 
average $50 − $30 = $20 per trade. But in reality, the opposite trade would be 
a −$10 loser. When reversing systems, you must add in double the commissions 
and slippage. Here is the math:
−$50 average trade, after slippage and commissions 
+$30 commission and slippage
−$20 average trade, no slippage or commissions 
 Now fl ip the system to produce the opposite result, and then add commissions 
and slippage back in 
+$20 average trade, no slippage or commissions 
−$30 commission and slippage
−$10 average trade, opposite system, with slippage and commissions 
\n\n=== PAGE 123 ===\n109
LIMITED TESTING
 I believe when people ponder trading the opposite system, they neglect to add in 
the commissions and slippage correctly. This is why most “opposite” systems, while 
appealing on the surface, rarely if ever work in the real world. 
 At this point in the process, if my strategy has performed successfully, I will have 
tested the entry, the exit, and the core system, with all results suggesting that a trad-
able system  might be achievable (remember, we have many more steps to go through 
before deciding a system is indeed tradable). This is just preliminary testing, the fi rst
hurdle, but when I even make it this far, I am somewhat encouraged. At this point,
it is on to the last step in the preliminary process. This step involves animals, at least
on a fi gurative level. 
 
■ Monkey See, Monkey Do
 One of the last tests I like to run is what I call “Monkey See, Monkey Do.”  The es-
sence of the test is to see if my strategy does better than a dart‐throwing monkey. In
1973, a book by Burton Malkiel claimed that “throwing darts at a newspaper’s fi nan-
cial pages could select a portfolio that would do just as well as one carefully selected 
by experts.”  The book, “A Random Walk Down Wall Street”
“ 
(W. W. Norton, 1973), is a 
”
classic for investors and traders, and the monkey idea resonated with many people. 
After all, no one wants to perform worse than a monkey! I personally don’t sub-
scribe to all the talk about markets being random—if I did, I would really have no 
business searching for a trading edge. Since prolonged edges would not exist in ran-
dom markets, I fi nd the monkey test a very useful one.
 With any strategy I create, the strategy’s performance better be signifi cantly im-
proved over what any monkey could do by just throwing darts. If it is not, then I have 
no desire to trade such a strategy. I use three diff erent monkey tests and two diff erent 
time frames for testing. Passing all of the tests gives me confi dence I have something 
better than random. 
 Test 1: “Monkey Entry” 
 The fi rst test I run is to see if the entry I developed is better than random. I simply 
replace the entry in my strategy with an entry than creates a randomly generated 
entry. I run the random entry, with the rest of my strategy intact, 8,000 times. This
generates 8,000 unique performance reports, since each run will have diff erent ran-
domly generated entries. By adjusting the frequency of the entry signals, I ensure
that I get close to the same number of trades as my walk‐forward history. Also, I try
to match the percentage of long and short trades. These two conditions mean that 
the “monkey” trades as often as my system does, and in roughly the same proportion 
of long and short trades.
\n\n=== PAGE 124 ===\n110
LIMITED TESTING
 Typically, a good strategy will beat the monkey 9 times out of 10 in net profi t and 
in maximum drawdown. For my 8,000 monkey trials, that means approximately 
7,200 must have net profi t worse than my results, and the same number of runs with
higher maximum drawdown than my walk‐forward results. If I don’t reach these 
goals, I really have to wonder if my entry is truly better than random.
 Test 2: “Monkey Exit” 
 The second test I run is to see if the exit I developed is better than random. It is 
much like the entry test, obviously, except in this case the monkey randomly exits 
the position. I control the random exit primarily by keeping the number of bars in a
trade the same as my walk‐forward history. For example, if my walk‐forward history
has an average of four bars per trade and always exits at the end of the day, I will tune
the random exit to be on average the same. Also, it will always exit at the end of the 
day, if that is my criterion.
 As with the monkey entry, I look for my walk‐forward results to be better than 
90 percent of the monkey exits.
 Test 3: “Monkey Entry, Monkey Exit” 
 After determining that my strategy is better than both a monkey entry and a monkey 
exit, I like to see that my strategy is better than a monkey entry  and exit. I do this 
d
because sometimes my edge is in the interaction of the entry and exit. For example, 
it might be that my entry is valid only because I set the exit near a support or re-
sistance zone. It might be that the entry, taken alone, or the exit, taken alone, isn’t
enough without the other. 
 In this test, I replace all entry and exit code with random monkey code. I adjust 
the parameters of the random entry and exit to match my strategy in the following 
ways: 
 
■ Number of trades 
 
■ Ratio of long trades to short trades
 
■ Average bars spent in a trade
 Note that these conditions are the same I apply to the other monkey tests. Then 
I run the monkey entry, monkey exit strategy 8,000 times, just like the other tests, 
and compare results the same way.
 Time Frames
 The fi rst time I run the monkey tests is in the development stage, as one more hurdle 
for a strategy to overcome. Most of the time, though, running these tests over the 
\n\n=== PAGE 125 ===\n111
LIMITED TESTING
walk‐forward time frame will almost always yield good results. This is because bad 
strategies will likely never get this far in the development process. Still, though, I 
like to see my strategy pass this test. It gives me confi dence that I may indeed have
an edge. 
 The other time frame I use to run the monkey tests is when running the strategy 
live. I take the results of the past 6 to 12 months (3 months may also be a good num-
ber, although the validity may be questionable if the number of trades is low). If, in
that 6‐ to 12‐month time period, the monkeys became a lot better, I know that my
assumed edge has either degraded or disappeared completely. It might then be time
for me to quit trading that system. 
 Monkey Testing—Example
 To give you an idea of how the monkey test works, in both the walk‐forward history 
and the real‐time history, I will provide an example in this section. 
 Figure  12.1 shows the walk‐forward performance of the as‐developed system, 
along with the performance after initial development. The system did quite well for
a while, but eventually endured some signifi cant drawdowns. The question is: could 
the 6‐month monkey test have shown that the edge in this system was gone, and that 
trading should have ceased? To answer that question, I will perform monkey tests at
the points shown on the graph. 
 FIGURE 12.1
 Sample System Walk‐Forward Performance 
May 2013
Feb./Mar. 2012
Performance after
development
Walk-forward history
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 125 ===\nwalk-forward time frame will almost always yield good results, This is because bad
strategies will likely never get this far in the development process. Still, though, I
like to see my strategy pass this test. It gives me confidence that I may indeed have
an edge.

The other time frame I use to run the monkey tests is when running the strategy
live. I take the results of the past 6 to 12 months (3 months may also be a good num-
ber, although the vali
that 6- to 12-month time period, the monkeys became a lot better, I know that my

ity may be questionable if the number of trades is low). If, in

assumed edge has either degraded or disappeared completely. It might then be time
for me to quit trading that system.

Monkey Testing—Example

To give you an idea of how the monkey test works, in both the walk-forward history
and the real-time history, I will provide an example in this section.

Figure 12.1 shows the walk-forward performance of the as-developed system,
along with the performance after initial development. The system did quite well for
a while, but eventually endured some significant drawdowns. The question is: could
the 6-month monkey test have shown that the edge in this system was gone, and that
trading should have ceased? To answer that question, I will perform monkey tests at
the points shown on the graph.

uty Cave Line -@C DaO3T8 1719 e9ear9 17:33)
snes \
cos }

Awl Mi WW May 2013

Feb/Mar. 2012
|

Syl

nay)

Performance after

Walk-forward history lopment

Lahey

(Created wit TradeStation, ©TradeStaton Technologies, Inc. Al rights reserved.

FIGURE 12.1 Sample System Walk-Forward Performance

© NILSAL CALITT
\n\n=== PAGE 126 ===\n112
LIMITED TESTING
 The code, in TradeStation Easy Language, for the baseline strategy, and the three 
monkey strategies, are shown in Appendix A.
 The fi rst step in creating random strategies that are comparable to the baseline 
strategy is to gather the pertinent statistics of the baseline strategy. These are shown
in Table  12.1 .
 All of the information in Table  12.1 can be obtained from the performance report. 
The two parameters I will use to compare to random strategies are the net profi t and the
maximum intraday drawdown. All other parameters listed will be used to “tune” the 
random strategy. The goal with tuning is to have roughly the same numbers of trades,
the same percentage of long and short trades, and the same average time in trades 
for the random strategy as for the baseline strategy. Doing this will allow a fair com-
parison of the two strategies. 
 Once the random strategies all yield roughly the same number of trades as the 
baseline strategy, I can run each random strategy 8,000 times. Then I can compare
the results. These results are shown in Table  12.2 .
 The results are pretty clear—the baseline strategy is much, much better than any 
random strategy. Score one for the humans over the monkeys! Based on this informa-
tion, the baseline strategy clearly passes the random test. 
 TABLE 12.1  Baseline Performance 
Parameter
Value
Time period
3/19/2007–11/1/2011
Net profit
$72,650
Maximum intraday drawdown
−$22,270
Number of trades
430
Percentage of long trades
40 percent
Average bars in trade
2.5
Number of trading days
1,165
Number of trades/Number of trading days
0.37
 TABLE 12.2  Random “Monkey”  Test 1 
Test Period: 3/19/2007 to 
11/1/2011
Percentage of Cases with 
Net Profit Worse than 
Baseline Case
Percentage of Cases with 
Maximum Intraday Drawdown
Worse than Baseline Case
Random entry, baseline exit
100%
99%
Baseline entry, random exit
99%
94%
Random entry, random exit
99%
99%
\n\n=== PAGE 127 ===\n113
LIMITED TESTING
 But how does the baseline strategy compare to the random strategies a few months 
later? Referring to Figure  12.1 , the baseline strategy ran into some diffi  culty around 
February–March 2012. Assuming an end date of March 1, 2012, over the previous 
12 months, the strategy had a net profi t of $780, and a maximum intraday drawdown 
of −$15,680. How does that compare with the random strategies? After 8,000 runs,
here are the results (see Table  12.3 ). 
 The results should present some cause for concern. Clearly, the baseline strategy 
has performed only slightly better than a random strategy, depending on the number
you focus on. Personally, I look at all the numbers as a group, and if I see most of 
them at or below 60 to 70 percent, I become concerned. If most of the numbers are 
below 50 percent, I become very concerned, since by all measures, my strategy is
not performing better than the monkeys.
 In this particular case, with only one value below 50 percent, and two values 
below 70 percent, I’d probably let the strategy continue trading. More conserva-
tive traders might decide to stop trading at this point, and that is a reasonable 
decision, too. 
 The next time the baseline strategy caused concern was in May 2013. Over the 
year ending May 1, 2013, the baseline strategy lost −$1,105, with a maximum
intraday drawdown of −$15,100. How does that compare to the random monkey 
systems? See Table  12.4 .
 TABLE 12.3  Random “Monkey”  Test 2 
Test Period: 3/1/2011 to 
3/1/2012
Percentage of Random
Cases with Net Profit Worse 
than Baseline Case ($780)
Percentage of Random Cases
with Maximum Intraday 
Drawdown Worse than 
Baseline Case (–$15,680)
Random entry, baseline exit
49%
73%
Baseline entry, random exit
99%
100%
Random entry, random exit
60%
95%
 TABLE 12.4  Random “Monkey”  Test 3 
Test Period: 5/1/2012 to 
5/1/2012
Percentage of Random 
Cases with Net Profit Worse 
than Baseline Case (–$1,105)
Percentage of Random Cases
with Maximum Intraday 
Drawdown Worse than 
Baseline Case (–$15,100)
Random entry, baseline exit
50%
64%
Baseline entry, random exit
1%
1%
Random entry, random exit
49%
72%
\n\n=== PAGE 128 ===\n114
LIMITED TESTING
 The results here are much clearer now. On average, the monkey systems are equal 
to or better than the baseline strategy. This indicates that any edge the strategy origi-
nally had is gone or is certainly on hiatus. Wise traders would stop trading this sys-
tem near the beginning of May 2013. In this case, judging from the performance of 
the baseline strategy after May 1, 2013, that was a good decision. 
 Comparison of your strategy to randomly generated strategies can be useful, too. 
In the preceding example system, the analysis was able to show that the strategy as 
developed was signifi cantly better than a random, monkey‐throwing‐darts system. 
That is nice to know, as it gives you confi dence as you begin to trade.
 Unfortunately, running this analysis when you develop the strategy tells you noth-
ing about how well the strategy will work going forward. The strategy itself could be 
defective, leading to real‐time losses. Or the characteristics of the market may have 
changed, and your strategy cannot adapt to it. In either case, periodically compar-
ing the baseline strategy results to the random monkey results can help you decide
whether the strategy is broken. As the earlier analysis shows, the random test can be 
an early warning detection method of sorts, and can suggest that you stop trading 
the strategy until performance becomes better than random. Thus, it can be a useful
tool in deciding when to stop trading a strategy. 
\n\n=== PAGE 129 ===\n115
 O
nce I have a trading system that I believe has some sort of edge to it, and it 
passes all the preliminary tests I throw at it, then I feel comfortable going on 
to more in‐depth testing. As stated earlier, there are four primary ways of testing:
 
■ Historical back testing—all in‐sample 
 
■ Out‐of‐sample testing 
 
■ Walk‐forward testing
 
■ Real‐time testing
 Over the years I have successfully and unsuccessfully used each one of these 
approaches. Currently, I believe that walk‐forward analysis off ers the best combina-
tion of amount of history that can be tested, degree of match between historical and 
real‐time results, and sensitivity to changing market conditions. During the in‐depth 
testing phase described in this chapter, I will use only walk‐forward testing. But 
before we get into a discussion about walk‐forward testing, what if you don’t have 
any parameters to optimize?
In‐Depth Testing/
Walk‐Forward
p
Analysis 
 C H A P T E R   1 3  
\n\n=== PAGE 130 ===\n116
IN‐DEPTH TESTING/WALK‐FORWARD ANALYSIS
 
■ No Parameters
 Occasionally, you may develop a system that has no parameters to optimize at all. For 
example, your entry may be based on a specifi c candlestick chart pattern, and your 
exit might be a set‐dollar‐amount stop‐loss, with a set profi t target. For whatever
reason, you may decide that you never want to change these values for stop-loss and 
target, and you do not want to change the entry. Your philosophy may be “no opti-
mization, ever,” which is certainly one way to avoid curve fi tting or overfi tting of the 
system to the data. 
 In situations such as this, your in‐depth analysis will simply consist of one histori-
cal test through the data. If the results meet your goals, you can simply move on to
the next step. If not, you should discard the strategy and move on to the next idea.
 One important point is that if your optimizationless strategy does not work, you 
should not go back and tweak the strategy, followed by rerunning it. For example, if 
you run it the fi rst time and are displeased with the results, you should not change 
the entry to a diff erent candlestick pattern and try again. That is just an optimization
of the entry, done a diff erent way. But it is still optimization.
 If you think this technique might apply to you, you can turn these two unique 
strategies into one optimizable strategy, following the pseudo code technique shown
below: 
 Strategy 1
 Enter long with candlestick pattern A
 Stop‐loss $X, profi t target $Y
 Strategy 2
 Enter long with candlestick pattern B
 Stop‐loss $X, profi t target $Y
 Strategy 3—strategies 1 and 2 combined 
 For i = 1 to 2 
 If i = 1, enter long with candlestick pattern A
 If i = 2, enter long with candlestick pattern B
 Stop‐loss $X, profi t target $Y
 The benefi t of such an approach is that you know up front that you are optimizing 
(no hidden or forgotten optimizations to taint your results), and it may very well
be that a combination of strategies (e.g., strategy 1 might be better in year 1, but 
strategy 2 might be better in year 2) might be better than either by itself. 
 If you truly decide that you have no parameters to optimize, simply substitute the 
walk‐forward analysis shown later for a single‐run historical analysis. If the results 
are favorable, you can then proceed to the next step. In most situations, though, 
\n\n=== PAGE 131 ===\n117
IN‐DEPTH TESTING/WALK‐FORWARD ANALYSIS
you will have at least one parameter to optimize, and for those cases walk‐forward 
analysis is the best way to go.
 
■ A Walk-Forward Primer
 Many people are confused by walk‐forward testing and how it really is diff erent from 
traditional optimization. I think understanding the walk‐forward concept has been 
made even more diffi  cult to understand by the introduction of it in most trading 
software packages. In the “old” days, without specialized software or a spreadsheet,
walk‐forward testing had to be performed by hand or custom computer program-
ming. In fact, when I had my successful run in the World Cup trading contest, I
relied on strategies developed with walk‐forward testing conducted by hand. It was 
diffi  cult and tedious, but it gave me a clear understanding of how the process works.
 To bring the concept down to earth, I will fi rst demonstrate the process on a 
simple breakout trading system. In this way, you can see step by step how the walk‐
forward analysis is done. 
 First, some simple defi nitions regarding the walk‐forward analysis are in order:
In period. This is the chunk of historical data that will be optimized.
Out period. This is the chunk of historical data that will be evaluated using opti-
mized results from the adjacent in period. 
Fitness factor. This is the criterion used to determine the “best” result, allowing us
to select the optimized parameters.
Anchored/Unanchored test. This tells us whether or not the in period start date shifts
with time, or if the start date is always the same. 
 Although I will discuss the details of how to select these parameters a bit later, for 
our test case we will use a 5‐year in period, a 1‐year out period, fi tness factor of net
profi t, and an unanchored test.
 Our strategy will be a very simple one: a countertrend breakout‐type system: 
 Enter short if the close is an “X”‐day high close 
 Enter long if the close is a “Y”‐day low close
 Stop‐loss of “Z” 
 In TradeStation Easy Language, the system code becomes:
 input: X(5), Y(5), Z(200);
 if close=highest(close,X) then buy next bar at market; 
 if close=lowest(close,Y) then sellshort next bar at market; 
 SetStopLoss(Z); 
\n\n=== PAGE 132 ===\n118
IN‐DEPTH TESTING/WALK‐FORWARD ANALYSIS
 For this example, we will use the continuous contract for the mini S&P (ES), and 
use 10 years of data, from January 1, 2000, to January 1, 2010. We will use daily bars
and include $25 slippage and commission per round trip trade. 
 For comparison purposes, fi rst we will optimize over all the data from 2000 to 
2010. Using net profi t as our fi tness function criteria, we get the optimum values: 
 X = 9
 Y = 5 
 Z = $600
 This complete optimization produces a net profi t of $55,162 over the 10‐year period. 
 Now, we will run the walk‐forward analysis. Since we are running a 5‐year op-
timization period, we will fi rst optimize from January 1, 2000, to January 1, 2005. 
When we do this, we get the following parameters for the highest net profi t case: 
 X = 7
 Y = 17
 Z = $600
 That completes out fi rst in‐sample evaluation. Now we apply the preceding pa-
rameters to our fi rst out‐of‐sample period, January 1, 2005, to January 1, 2006. 
Note that it is considered out‐of‐sample because it was not in the fi rst optimization 
period. The results of this fi rst out‐of‐sample yields a loss of $3,138.
 In a similar fashion, we then run the in‐sample optimizations, and the out‐of‐
sample performance runs for each of the rows shown in Table  13.1 . 
 Once we are complete, we have our walk‐forward analysis. To create a complete 
performance report of the walk‐forward data, we can create a strategy where the val-
ues change every time the walk‐forward period changes. Such a strategy looks like this: 
 var: X(5), Y(5), Z(200);
 If date>1050101 and date<1060101 then begin 
 x=7; y=17; z=600; 
 end; 
 TABLE 13.1  Sample Walk‐Forward Test Results 
In‐Sample Test Period
Best Parameters X,  Y, Z
Out‐of‐Sample Period
Out‐of‐Sample Result
1/1/2000–1/1/2005
7,17,600
1/1/2005–1/1/2006
−$3,138
1/1/2001–1/1/2006
7,45,100
1/1/2006–1/1/2007
−$2,325
1/1/2002–1/1/2007
49,7,600
1/1/2007–1/1/2008
+$5,963
1/1/2003–1/1/2008
21,11,1000
1/1/2008–1/1/2009
−$19,113
1/1/2004–1/1/2009
9,5,600
1/1/2009–1/1/2010
+$8,675
\n\n=== PAGE 133 ===\n119
IN‐DEPTH TESTING/WALK‐FORWARD ANALYSIS
 If date>1060101 and date<1070101 then begin 
 x=7; y=45; z=100; 
 end; 
 If date>1070101 and date<1080101 then begin 
 x=49; y=7; z=600; 
 end; 
 If date>1080101 and date<1090101 then begin 
 x=21; y=11; z=1000; 
 end; 
 If date>1090101 and date<1100101 then begin 
 x=9; y=5; z=600; 
 end; 
 If date>1100101 and date<1110101 then begin 
 x=9; y=5; z=600; 
 end; 
 If date>1110101 and date<1120101 then begin 
 x=9; y=5; z=700; 
 end; 
 If date>1120101 and date<1130101 then begin 
 x=9; y=5; z=700; 
 end; 
 If date>1130101 and date<1140101 then begin 
 x=9; y=5; z=700; 
 end; 
 if close=highest(close,X) then sellshort next bar at market; 
 if close=lowest(close,Y) then buy next bar at market;
 SetStopLoss(Z); 
 This will allow us to compare the walk‐forward results to the optimized results. 
This is shown in Figure  13.1 . The interesting points of this comparison are: 
 
■ The optimized equity curve is much, much better than the walk‐forward 
curve. This is to be expected, since the optimized curve is a result of 
optimization. This should tell you that practically any strategy can be made 
to look good, if you optimize the parameters over the time period you are 
interested in. 
 
■ The walk‐forward results are not very good. Walk‐forward analysis is a tough test 
for a strategy to “pass.” Most strategies fail at this analysis. But since this simulates
real life more than fully optimized results do, it is a more accurate method of 
analysis.
\n\n=== PAGE 134 ===\n120
IN‐DEPTH TESTING/WALK‐FORWARD ANALYSIS
 I have mentioned it a few times, but you still might be wondering, “How do you 
know walk‐forward analysis is more representative of future performance that the 
fully optimized test?” I claim this based on my experience. The current system is 
a good example of this performance diff erence. For the analysis just completed, 
here is how the optimized and walk‐forward analysis performed from January 1, 
2010, to November 14, 2013. As you can see in Figure  13.2 , for the optimized 
case, the performance during the out‐of‐sample period 2010–2013 was fl at. It 
looks nothing at all like the optimized portion of the curve from 2005 to 2009, 
where the average annual gain was approximately $10,000. It is a diff erent story 
for the walk‐forward analysis, as depicted in Figure  13.2 . The years 2010–2013 
were fl at for the walk‐forward equity curve also, but it mimics the 2005–2009 
walk‐forward results. In other words, the performance of the walk‐forward sys-
tem did not change through the years—it was consistently fl at to down most of 
the years. 
 While one example does not make it a rule, in general this is the kind of per-
formance you can expect from optimized back tests and walk‐forward back tests. 
Optimized results, when applied to out of sample data, generally degrade. This is
why so many people get frustrated with systems sold by unscrupulous vendors. 
These vendors show optimized results, and the performance in the future is al-
most never as good as the back test. Walk‐forward results, however, should perform 
about the same throughout the whole test period. This is why many traders prefer 
 FIGURE 13.1  Walk‐Forward Results vs. Optimized Results, as Developed 
$60,000
$50,000
$40,000
$30,000
$20,000
Optimized Cum.
Walk-forward Cum.
$10,000
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
$0
($10,000)
($20,000)
($30,000)
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 134 ===\nIN-DEPTH TESTING/WALK-FORWARD ANALYSIS | =

is
Ss

$60,000

$50,000

$40,000

$30,000

$20,000
=e Optimized Cum.

$10,000 > Walk-forward Cum,

$0

($10,000)

(820,000)

(830,000)
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009

FIGURE 13.1 Walk-Forward Results vs. Optimized Results, as Developed

Thave mentioned it a few times, but you still might be wondering, “How do you

know walk-forward analysis is more representative of future performance that the

fully optimized test?” I claim this based on my experience. The current system is
a good example of this performance difference. For the analysis just completed,
here is how the optimized and walk-forward analysis performed from January 1,
2010, to November 14, 2013. As you can see in Figure 13.2, for the optimized
case, the performance during the out-of-sample period 2010-2013 was flat. It
looks nothing at all like the optimized portion of the curve from 2005 to 2009,
where the average annual gain was approximately $10,000. It is a different story
, as depicted in Figure 13.2. The years 2010-2013

were flat for the walk-forward equity curve also, but it mimics the 2005-2009

for the walk-forward analysi

walk-forward results. In other words, the performance of the walk-forward sys-
tem did not change through the years—it was consistently flat to down most of
the years.

While one example does not make it a rule, in general this is the kind of per-
formance you can expect from optimized back tests and walk-forward back tests.

Optimized results, when applied to out of sample data, generally degrade. This is
why so many people get frustrated with systems sold by unscrupulous vendors.
These vendors show optimized results, and the performance in the future is al-
most never as good as the back test. Walk-forward results, however, should perform
about the same throughout the whole test period. This is why many traders prefer
\n\n=== PAGE 135 ===\n121
IN‐DEPTH TESTING/WALK‐FORWARD ANALYSIS
walk‐forward results. Walk‐forward analysis tends to produce equity curves that are 
more stable going forward. Again, that is not a rule, but it is my experience that this is
generally true. 
 
■Walk-Forward Inputs
 If we are performing the analysis by hand, as described above, we must know the 
following parameters  before we start the analysis: 
 In period
 Out period 
 Fitness function
 Method: anchored or unanchored
 In you are using software to perform the analysis (as I currently do), you do 
not necessarily have to know these values in advance. That is both a blessing and 
a curse. It is good because you only have to run the optimization once and not 
keep repeating the walk‐forward analysis over and over. It is bad because these 
parameters can be optimized, just like any traditional input parameter in your 
strategy. It may not seem like an optimization, at least in the traditional sense, 
but if you, for example, look at two values of in period, and choose the one with 
 FIGURE 13.2
 Walk-Forward Results vs. Optimized Results, Before and After Development 
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 135 ===\n$60,000

OUT OF SAMPLE

$50,000
$40,000

330,000 i
s optimized

—+ Optimized Cum.

$20,000 a+ Walkforward Cum.

$10,000

$0
2k
($10,000)

9 20102011 2013

walkforward
($20,000) caiman

($30,000)

FIGURE 13.2 Walk-Forward Results vs. Optimized Results, Before and After Development

walk-forward results. Walk-forward analysis tends to produce equity curves that are
more stable going forward. Again, that is not a rule, but it is my experience that this is
generally true.

| Walk-Forward Inputs

If we are performing the analysis by hand, as described above, we must know the
following parameters before we start the analysis

In period
Out period

Fitness function

Method: anchored or unanchored

In you are using software to perform the analysis (as I currently do), you do
not necessarily have to know these values in advance. That is both a blessing and
a curse. It is good because you only have to run the optimization once and not
keep repeating the walk-forward analysis over and over, It is bad because these
parameters can be optimized, just like any traditional input parameter in your
strategy. It may not seem like an optimization, at least in the traditional sense,
but if you, for example, look at two values of in period, and choose the one with

SISATVNY (UVMUOS-NTVM / DNLLSAL HLdIO-NT
\n\n=== PAGE 136 ===\n122
IN‐DEPTH TESTING/WALK‐FORWARD ANALYSIS
better results, that is still optimizing. You want to make the decision before you 
do the analysis. 
 Assuming you will be choosing the walk‐forward inputs beforehand (we will ex-
amine an alternative method to this later), how do we choose values for each of 
them? A method for determining each value is described below. 
 In Period
 For the in period, the goal is to get enough trades to make a meaningful conclusion 
as to the best parameters to use for each period. It makes sense, then, to get a cer-
tain amount of trades per input variable in your in period. For example, if you have 
four inputs to optimize, then you might want 100 to 200 trades in your in period,
which would be equivalent to 25 to 50 trades per input. Unfortunately, there is no 
set number of trades per input that is “best,” although many people say that 30 is a
good number for statistical signifi cance.
 Out Period 
 As crazy as it sounds, I know people who do walk‐forward analysis every day, 
which means their out period is one day. Personally, I think this is extreme, but 
who am I to argue if they are having success? There are a couple of factors at play 
in the selection of an out period. First, if you set the out period too big, you might 
only have one or two out periods for your walk‐forward analysis, which means 
the test becomes similar to a single‐period out‐of‐sample test. Second, if you set 
the out period too small, you will be conducting reoptimizations on a daily or 
weekly basis. This might not be sustainable given the limited time you likely have 
to develop and trade, if you have many systems to reoptimize. Knowing that there 
are boundaries to the out period, I generally set my out period to between 10 to 
50 percent of the in period. So, if my in period is 1,000 days, my out period might 
be in the range of 100 to 500 days. This is a very wide range, but with robust sys-
tems you will generally see that the fi nal results are not extremely sensitive to out 
period. A 100‐day out period may very well perform about the same as a 500‐day 
out period. 
 
■ Fitness Function
 Of all the parameters in walk‐forward analysis, the fi tness function is the most con-
tentious. I’m sure that raucous debate by two developers over the fi tness function 
has at some time resulted in physical violence (such dedication to the cause!). I don’t 
want to stir the pot by going into the pros and cons of various fi tness functions, but 
I will tell you the ones I have had the most success with.
\n\n=== PAGE 137 ===\n123
IN‐DEPTH TESTING/WALK‐FORWARD ANALYSIS
 Net Profi t
 For many people, this is the default choice, and it is a pretty good one. After all, 
without profi t at the end of the test, all other parameters are meaningless. I person-
ally use this fi tness factor the most, since it is easy to understand and implement.
But it does not take into account another important results: drawdown. My experi-
ence, however, has been that in general high net profi t runs hand in hand with low
maximum drawdown. If you decide drawdown is a must have, then one of the fi tness 
function below should suit you. 
 Linearity of Equity Curve 
 Think for a minute of your ideal equity curve. The equity would go up every day, 
and it would be consistent. A real‐world example is interest on a banking or money 
market account. Interest earned might be very small, but with a bank account, you
make money every day, and there is never a day where you lose money. If only you
could design a futures system that made money every day, with never a drawdown! A 
linear, upward‐sloping equity curve is the ideal, and is a great parameter to optimize 
for. The problem is that, unless your software includes this fi tness function as a set
choice, it may be diffi  cult in actual practice to actually optimize for it. Also, it may 
be diffi  cult to implement in a nonanchored walk‐forward test. Finally, this method 
of optimization may select very low net profi t iterations as the optimum, since they
may exhibit the most linearity. There are two potential problems with the low‐profi t 
cases: fi rst, since there is not much profi t, if you underestimate your slippage and 
commissions, you might actually be selecting a real‐time losing strategy. Second, if 
the end result is very small average profi t per trade, minor changes in the market
may render your eff ective ineff ective.
 One big plus to using a linear equity curve as your optimization criteria is that it 
is very good for position sizing. Think about a strategy where your drawdowns are
minimal and your profi ts are slow and steady. Such an approach would be ideal for 
aggressive position sizing.
 Return on Account
 If you explicitly use maximum drawdown in your fi tness function, then return on 
account is a good option. Although some software packages vary in their defi nition, 
return on account is generally defi ned as:
 Return on Account = Net Profi t/(Maximum Drawdown + Required Margin)
 Since required margin varies over time, many people just eliminate this from the 
calculation by assuming it is equal to zero or some other arbitrary value. As a fi tness 
\n\n=== PAGE 138 ===\n124
IN‐DEPTH TESTING/WALK‐FORWARD ANALYSIS
function, return on account is nice to use, since it takes into account both the profi t, 
and the risk it took to get that profi t. The biggest drawback to using it is that it can
give wildly diff erent results from period to period using unanchored walk‐forward 
analysis.
 
■ Anchored/Unanchored 
 One subtle aspect of walk‐forward analysis is the optimization window. You can go 
one of two ways with this window: you can move it with time, or you can keep 
the start point anchored. Figure  13.3 shows the diff erence between these two
approaches. 
 In general, the two methods will give similar results, especially at the beginning 
of the analysis. But as time goes on, the results will tend to diverge. This is because 
the anchored walk‐forward is always taking into account results over the whole 
data set, while the unanchored results include results for only the most recent 
window. There may be times where one is more appropriate than the other, but 
I tend to use the unanchored method much more. I like that approach, since it 
ensures that only the most recent data is included in the optimization. I don’t 
necessarily want results from 10 years ago still impacting my optimization 
results today. 
 One point of caution with using unanchored data, with certain fi tness functions, 
is that the results you get might be faulty, depending on your walk‐forward analysis
software. If you are using a manual method, this should not be a problem, but if you
use software, make sure that the calculations are based on the start and end dates in
question, not on diff erence in fi tness functions during the period.
 FIGURE 13.3
Anchored vs. Unanchored Walk‐Forward Analysis 
2007
Anchored Test
Unanchored Test
Anchored in sample 1
Walk-forward 1
In sample 1
Walk-forward 1
In sample 2
Walk-forward 2
In sample 3
Walk-forward 3
Anchored in sample 2
Walk-forward 2
Anchored in sample 3
Walk-forward 3
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 138 ===\nIN-DEPTH TESTING/WALK-FORWARD ANALYSIS | =

iS
Ed

function, return on account is nice to use, since it takes into account both the profit,
and the risk it took to get that profit. The biggest drawback to using it is that it can
give wildly different results from period to period using unanchored walk-forward
analysis.

= Anchored/Unanchored

One subtle aspect of walk-forward analysis is the optimization window. You can go
one of two ways with this window: you can move it with time, or you can keep
the start point anchored. Figure 13.3 shows the difference between these two
approaches.

In general, the two methods will give similar results, especially at the beginning
of the analysis. But as time goes on, the results will tend to diverge. This is because
the anchored walk-forward is always taking into account results over the whole
data set, while the unanchored results include results for only the most recent
window. There may be times where one is more appropriate than the other, but
I tend to use the unanchored method much more. I like that approach, since it
ensures that only the most recent data is included in the optimization. I don’t
necessarily want results from 10 years ago still impacting my optimization
results today.

One point of caution with using unanchored data, with certain fitness functions,
is that the results you get might be faulty, depending on your walk-forward analysis
software. If you are using a manual method, this should not be a problem, but if you
use software, make sure that the calculations are based on the start and end dates in
question, not on difference in fitness functions during the period.

2007
Anchored Test

Walk-forward 3

Unanchored Test

Walk-forward 2

In sample 3
Walk-forward 3

FIGURE 13.3 Anchored vs. Unanchored Walk-Forward Analysis
\n\n=== PAGE 139 ===\n125
IN‐DEPTH TESTING/WALK‐FORWARD ANALYSIS
 A simple example explains it well. Suppose you have the optimized results shown 
in Table 13.2.
 Note in this example that while net profit is additive (the net profit in year 1 
plus the net profit in year 2 equals the combined net profit for year 1 + year 2), 
the maximum drawdown and return on account are not. Some walk‐forward 
software packages may assume your fitness function is additive (like net profit), 
so make sure you understand how the software works when using unanchored 
results. Your analysis could be completely flawed depending on the fitness function 
you choose. 
 
■Running the Analysis 
 Once you have all your walk‐forward inputs defi ned, you simply run the analysis 
manually as I have shown in the earlier example, or automatically with the software. 
Either way, in the end, you will have the completed walk‐forward analysis and equity 
curve for your strategy. At this point, you have to compare the results to your goals 
and objectives. If the system passes, you of course go on to the next step. If it fails, 
theoretically you should discard the strategy and start with something diff erent. In 
reality, of course, that is extremely diffi  cult to do. You have already invested a great 
deal of time in preliminary testing and in‐depth testing, and it seems a shame that you 
should just discard your work. This is especially true if the results are close to your 
goal. Maybe lowering the goal or making a small change to the strategy and rerunning 
walk‐forward might be the path to success. Or does that just lead to more bad habits 
and decisions?
 In general, I normally would discard a strategy at this point, rather than com-
promise my goals or change my strategy. But sometimes I do one or both of these 
things. Occasionally, that turned out to be a good decision, but likely more often 
than not it did not work out well. Remember, the more you touch (test) histori-
cal data, the more likely you are to fi t your system to the data. Plus, when you 
relax your standards, you end up with something you really did not want. When 
real money is on the line, this may become a major point of contention for your 
 TABLE 13.2 Many Performance Metrics Are Not Additive
Optimization Period
Net Profit
Max Drawdown
Return on Account = Net Profit/
Max Drawdown
Year 1
$12,000
$6,000
2.0
Year 2
$6,000
$4,000
1.5
Year 1– Year 2
$18,000
$6,000
3.0
\n\n=== PAGE 140 ===\n126
IN‐DEPTH TESTING/WALK‐FORWARD ANALYSIS
psyche—why continue to trade a currently losing system that you had doubts 
about in the fi rst place?
 One common mistake during walk‐forward analysis is to surreptitiously optimize 
the  in and out periods. Say, for example, that you run the walk‐forward analysis with
four‐year in period, and one‐year out period. Walk‐forward results for that case are 
good, but not great, so you think “maybe I should use four years in, with two years
out.”  That case is 200 percent better and meets all your goals, so you decide “that’s
the combination to use. Let’s go!” 
 Stop. 
 Do you realize what just happened? As soon as you selected a second set of in/out 
parameters, reran the results, and selected the best case, you just optimized. Sure, 
it is not a full optimization, since you only compared two cases, but it was optimiza-
tion nevertheless. Remembering the rule that optimized results can’t be trusted, 
you have a dilemma here: accept the fi rst run (4 year/1 year), and then discard the 
strategy because it did not meet your goals, or accept the second run, and pretend 
you never optimized.
 Once again, I’ll admit to doing the above on occasion, although I can’t recall it 
ever ending well. The big question in all this is “is there a way to test multiple in/out 
periods, and select the best one, while still maintaining walk‐forward integrity?”  The 
answer, thankfully, is yes. The way to do it is to create, in essence, a second walk‐
forward analysis inside of the fi rst. The way to do this is to run the walk‐forward
analysis, as usual, but leave the last few years of data untouched. I typically will leave 
three years untouched. Then, with the walk‐forward data I have, I select the best in/
out pair I have, and then run it on the last three years of data. If it passes, then I go
on to the next step. If it doesn’t, I discard the strategy. But, in either case, at least I
have made some eff ort to select the best in/out combination. The downside to this 
approach is that you have optimized, and the more optimization you do, the worse 
off  you generally are.
 This process would look like this:
 1.  Years 2000–2008 >> run walk‐foward analysis for diff erent combinations of 
in/out periods, select the best in/out. 
 2.  Years 2009–present >> run walk‐forward analysis, using best in/out deter-
mined from Step 1. 
 3a.  If walk‐forward results from 2009–present look good, continue with 
development.
 3b.  If results do not look good, it is probably best to abandon strategy, rather than 
try again with another in/out pair. 
 Figure  13.4 depicts the approach of optimizing in/out periods, compared to a 
traditional walk‐forward analysis. 
\n\n=== PAGE 141 ===\n127
IN‐DEPTH TESTING/WALK‐FORWARD ANALYSIS
 
■Put the Walk-Forward Strategy Together
 Once you have completed the walk‐forward analysis, analyzed the results, and found 
that your results compare favorably to your objectives, you are almost ready for the
next step. There is just one more check to run, and that is with the completed walk‐
forward history strategy. The diff erence between the walk‐forward history strategy 
and the optimizable strategy is shown next: 
 Optimizable Strategy
 input: avg(10); 
 // strategy code 
 Walk‐Foward History Strategy 
 var: avg(10);
 If date is between Jan 1, 2010 and Jan 1, 2011 then
 avg=8 
 If date is between Jan 1, 2011 and Jan 1, 2012 then
 avg=12 
 If date is between Jan 1, 2012 and Jan 1, 2013 then
 avg=6 
 // strategy code 
 The strategy with the walk‐forward history changes the variables based on 
the date. In this way, you will have a seamless history for your strategy to run; 
you will not have to cut and paste results together to create the walk‐forward 
history.
 FIGURE 13.4
 Walk‐Forward Test, Inside Another Walk‐Forward Test 
Run walk-forward
test 2000-2007
Determine best
in/out periods
Run walk-forward
2008−present
with in/out from
previous step
If results of
2008−present
acceptable, use in/out
going forward
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 141 ===\ntest 2000-2007

Determine best
in/out periods

Run walk-forward
2008-present
with in/out from

previous step

If results of
2008-present
acceptable, use in/out
going forward

FIGURE 13.4 Walk-Forward Test, Ins

le Another Walk-Forward Test

= Put the Walk-Forward Strategy Together

Once you have completed the walk-forward analysis, analyzed the results, and found
that your results compare favorably to your objectives, you are almost ready for the
next step. There is just one more check to run, and that is with the completed walk-
forward history strategy. The difference between the walk-forward history strategy
and the optimizable strategy is shown next:

Optimizable Strategy
input: avg(10);
// strategy code

Walk-Foward History Strategy
var: avg(10);

If date is between Jan 1, 2010 and Jan 1, 2011 then
avg=8

If date is between Jan 1, 2011 and Jan 1, 2012 then
avg=12

If date is between Jan 1, 2012 and Jan 1, 2013 then
avg=6

// strategy code

The strategy with the walk-forward history changes the variables based on
the date. In this way, you will have a seamless history for your strategy to run;
you will not have to cut and paste results together to create the walk-forward
history.

12

i]

SISATVNY (UVMUOS-NTVM / DNLLSAL HLdIO-NT

\n\n=== PAGE 142 ===\n128
IN‐DEPTH TESTING/WALK‐FORWARD ANALYSIS
 Note that the results you get from this strategy might be diff erent from the results 
of a piece‐by‐piece analysis method. This is especially true for swing strategies that 
last for days or weeks. The reason this is so is that, based on the walk‐forward param-
eters, variables might change in the middle of a trade, causing trades to be exited 
or reversed. To see if this is important for your strategy, then, it becomes critical to 
create a stand‐alone walk‐forward history strategy.
\n\n=== PAGE 143 ===\n129
 O
nce you have the walk‐forward strategy set up, and you are satisfi ed with the 
results, it is time to evaluate the strategy in a Monte Carlo simulation. This is an 
important step because random simulations may show dramatically diff erent profi ts 
and drawdown. It may be that the way the historical trades lined up, the maximum 
drawdown was very small. But since history isn’t likely to repeat itself, it is impor-
tant to see what type of maximum drawdown you could possibly incur trading this 
strategy. 
 As stated earlier in Chapter  7 , I use an Excel spreadsheet to do the Monte Carlo 
analysis. You can download this tool for yourself at the book resource web site (www
.wiley.com/go/algotradingsystems). There are also numerous free and paid Monte 
Carlo simulators available on the Internet, should you choose to go that route. One 
good free simulator is Equity Monaco by NeoTick (equitymonaco.software.informer
.com/). A good pay tool is @Risk (www.palisade.com/). All of these choices will 
give you the same basic results, and you might prefer the presentation of results and 
capabilities of one over the other. The key is to get simulation results that you can 
base your decision on. 
 If you use the simulator spreadsheet I created, you simply copy trade results from 
your strategy performance report, paste them in the spreadsheet, enter your initial 
capital, quitting‐point capital, and number of trades in a year, and then press calculate. 
The spreadsheet will calculate the simulated equity curves for 2,500 iterations, and 
 Monte Carlo
Analysis and
Incubation 
y
 C H A P T E R   1 4  
\n\n=== PAGE 144 ===\n130
MONTE CARLO ANALYSIS AND INCUBATION
present you with summary results. These results will be based on one year of trading. 
Sample output of the spreadsheet was shown earlier in Figure 7.2. I typically focus
on the return to max drawdown ratio (ret/DD), and I like to see values above 2.0 
for an acceptable strategy. Anything below 2.0 suggests that the strategy is taking on 
too much risk for the reward attained and might not be worth trading.
 If you are profi cient in writing macros in Excel, you can easily take the Monte 
Carlo spreadsheet I have created and modify it to suit your own needs. You could 
add position sizing, for example, or you could change which results are presented. 
In the end, the point of the simulation is to give you results that you can understand 
and interpret. I have told you what works for me; maybe that will work for you, but 
maybe you’ll think of something better.
 
■ Incubation
 One of the most crucial steps in strategy development, in my opinion, is also the 
toughest psychologically to implement. Before I discuss this last step, let’s review
where we have been in the strategy development process: 
 1.  We have established goals and objectives for our completed strategy and also 
goals for the steps along the way. In this manner, we can quickly eliminate strate-
gies before spending too much time on them. 
 2.  We have developed a trading idea for our strategy that we feel has an edge. We 
have also defi ned the market, time frame, and other important factors for our 
testing. 
 3.  We have performed limited testing with the strategy, and we are happy with the 
results. We believe we might have an edge. 
 4.  We have conducted in‐depth testing, using walk‐forward testing if possible. 
Again, we are happy with the performance results obtained. 
 5.  We have performed Monte Carlo testing, to help us establish probabilities for 
the strategy performance and also to give us realistic future scenarios of perfor-
mance. 
 These completed fi ve steps represent a lot of work and likely caused us to discard 
tens or hundreds of strategies before fi nding success. To get through the last step,
Monte Carlo testing, is certainly an accomplishment. When this happens, you likely 
will be so excited you will want to trade immediately! That, of course, would be the
wrong thing to do. Incubation is the right thing to do. 
 What exactly is incubation? Simply put, it is watching and waiting. With incuba-
tion, you wait three to six months before you start live trading. During this time,
you occasionally monitor the performance of the strategy, as if it is another out‐of‐
sample test period. I like to check on my incubated strategies once per month. 
\n\n=== PAGE 145 ===\n131
MONTE CARLO ANALYSIS AND INCUBATION
 Why is it important to incubate a strategy? Here are a few reasons:
 
■ When you fi nish Monte Carlo testing, you are at an emotional high. Your “baby” 
has survived and has a lot of promise. You have a lot of emotional capital invested 
in this strategy, as well as your time and eff ort. You want it to succeed. You may
even  need it to succeed. Of course, this leads to a fragile emotional state. If you 
d
immediately start trading it with real money, you might not think clearly if things 
start out bad for the strategy, as so often seems to happen. This could lead you to 
quit the strategy early, or worse yet, haphazardly increase size when performance 
starts out bad (“doubling down”). 
 
■ By waiting for a while before live trading, you will forget about the blood, sweat, 
and tears you expended to create the strategy, and you will look at it more ob-
jectively. If it passes incubation, great—but if it doesn’t, you won’t be distraught. 
Remember, short‐term hardship is sometimes the price for long‐term success, 
and that defi nitely holds true with trading systems.
 
■ As I have shown, the system development process is diffi  cult and complicated. 
There are probably a thousand diff erent mistakes you can make along the way.
Some can be blatant, like overoptimizing, while others may be subtle, such as
using hindsight bias to develop your strategy rules. The point is that, because of 
development mistakes, there can be no way to know for sure if you have done 
something wrong until you test your strategy on live, unseen data. Major mistakes
will show up in live results almost immediately, and by keeping your cash on the 
sidelines during this period, you will save a great deal of money.
 
■ Incubating gives you a chance to see how a strategy performs in real time. You may 
fi nd out that you do not like the strategy, even if it makes money. For example, 
maybe your strategy sells every pivot high. In historical back testing, that may not 
bother you. But in real time, watching your strategy fi ght every market high might 
not be your cup of tea. It is far better to realize that now, rather than after you
commit money to trading it. 
 I generally perform incubation without real money. This is because, over time, 
I have concluded that the way I place orders, the bar types I use, and so on all can 
be fairly well replicated by the strategy back‐test engine. There are times, however, 
where you may want to commit real money on a small scale. For example, if your
strategy relies on limit orders for entries, you may want to test with real money to 
ensure that your fi lls match strategy engine fi lls. With some software packages, this
might not be the case. Also, if you use exotic bar types, back‐test results and real‐
money results can be totally diff erent. You might need a live real‐money test to check 
this, but once you confi rm an issue, you will be able to avoid those bar types in later 
strategies. Sometimes the only way to see if a back test is accurate is by testing the
strategy with real money. 
\n\n=== PAGE 146 ===\n132
MONTE CARLO ANALYSIS AND INCUBATION
 As I mentioned, I normally do not need to perform real‐money testing during 
incubation. One reason is that I avoid back tests that show or contain the following: 
 
■ Any buy fi lls at the low of a bar or sell fi lls at the high of a bar. Rare will be the day 
this occurs in real life, but many unscrupulous system vendors and naive develop-
ers develop strategies that frequently show this phenomenon.
 
■ Limit orders that fi ll when price is touched. On occasion, maybe 0 to 30 percent 
of the time, you will get fi lled at your limit price, when it is just touched. Most of 
the time, though, the price has to penetrate your price to guarantee a fi ll.
 
■ Any exotic bars, such as Renko, Kase, and even point‐and‐fi gure. Due to the way 
the bars are built from history, your strategy fi lls many times cannot be believed.
Better to just avoid these bars, except for real‐time discretionary trading.
 
■ Strategies that exit on same bar as entry or that have stops and targets so tight 
that a profi t and loss exit could occur on the same bar. My experience is that it is
easy to trick a strategy engine, even with tick data, when exits or entry and exits 
occur on the same bar. This is due to the assumptions the strategy engine must 
make regarding price travel. Usually, the results will be overly optimistic when
compared to real live trading. 
 
■ Evaluating Incubation 
 My goals with incubation are to give me reasonable assurance that I made no major 
mistakes during development, to remove my emotions from the process, and also
to see if real‐time performance is appealing enough to trade. Later in this book, I’ll
share some techniques I use to see if these goals are indeed met. 
\n\n=== PAGE 147 ===\n133
 A
s you progress through the trading system development process numerous 
times, you’ll start to realize that you have an algorithmic strategy factory on 
your hands. Raw material comes in the door as strategy ideas for entry and exit. Ma-
chines, such as limited testing, walk‐forward testing, and Monte Carlo simulation, 
work on your ideas and either shape it into a better product, or tear it to shreds. At 
the end of your factory, you end up with trading systems you can trade or garbage 
destined for the scrap heap. If you do this over and over, you’ll create a lot of garbage, 
but you’ll also have a stack of strategies to trade. That’s where diversifi cation can be 
a big contributor. 
 I’m sure you’ve heard the old saw, “Put your eggs in one basket, then watch that 
basket!” In trading, this would be analogous to fi nding one trading system (the bas-
ket) and then putting all your money (eggs) into it. That is great if it works. I’m sure 
there are traders out there who concentrate on trading one system. I’m not one of 
them, though, and I do not recommend that you try to be one either. Why not? Well, 
the simple fact is that trading systems fail, and very few, if any, trading systems last 
forever. In addition, all trading systems go through drawdowns, and sometimes they 
recover and sometimes they don’t. Do you really want your money tied to the for-
tunes (or misfortunes) of one trading strategy? I sure don’t! 
 To get around this issue, I take the opposite approach and use diversifi cation. 
Instead of one basket (trading system), I spread my capital among numerous, uncor-
related trading systems. In eff ect, I have many baskets, and although it takes more 
eff ort to watch and track each basket, the benefi ts are clear: 
 
■Less worry about a system’s failing. When you trade one system, you are at the mercy 
of that system or the approach behind the system. If you have a trend‐following 
approach and the market goes fl at for a few years, you will be in drawdown until 
 Diversifi cation
 C H A P T E R   1 5  
\n\n=== PAGE 148 ===\n134
DIVERSIFICATION
the market starts to trend. When you trade multiple systems with diff erent styles, 
it is very likely that your countertrend systems will do good when your trend
systems do bad, and vice versa.
 
■Fewer fi ll issues. In trading one system, as your capital grows, so will your trading 
size. Eventually, your size will become large enough to aff ect your fi lls. Even trad-
ing 10 contracts in gold, for example, is enough that any stop‐loss orders you have 
will likely experience a few extra ticks of slippage as your 10 lot gets fi lled. How-
ever, if you trade numerous systems, your size on any one trade will be smaller, 
making fi lls less of an issue. 
 
■Smoother equity curve. When you diversify correctly, you will have diff erent styles,
diff erent markets, and diff erent time frames with your trading systems. These dif-
ferences come together to produce a smoother equity curve, many times reduc-
ing drawdown, and almost always reducing overall volatility. 
 Diversifi cation, done properly, is probably the closest thing I’ve ever seen to the 
so‐called trading “Holy Grail.” The tricks behind diversifi cation are then (1) how to 
design systems with diversifi cation in mind and (2) how to measure that you actually
have diversifi cation. I’ll discuss each of these topics in this chapter. 
 
■ Designing with Diversiﬁ cation in Mind 
 In the next section, I describe simple ways to measure diversification, but I use 
these measures after the fact, not during the design process. This is because it 
is difficult to look at a trading system, identify its weak points, and then design 
a second complementary system to smooth the first one. It can be done, but I 
think that is the tough way. I take a much simpler approach, and it seems to work 
quite well.
 If you look back at the initial stages of strategy development, you’ll recall that we 
identify certain characteristics of the system we are trading: 
 
■ Market
 
■ Bar type/size 
 
■ Any custom time sessions 
 
■ Entry
 
■ Exit 
 As it turns out, taking an initial strategy and varying a couple of these strategy 
characteristics will likely produce an uncorrelated system. It becomes as simple as 
doing something diff erent with your trading idea!
\n\n=== PAGE 149 ===\n135
DIVERSIFICATION
 A good example of this is with the two euro futures strategies I design in 
Part IV of this book. Although the market traded is exactly the same, I altered 
the bar size (105‐minute bars versus 60-minute bars), the time session (one 
strategy trades at night, the other during the day), the entries (completely dif-
ferent entries for each strategy) and exits (different exits, where one system 
strives for small profits, and the other goes for outsized gains). These change 
cause completely different system behavior, leading to different results, and 
consequently diversification. 
 
■ Measuring Diversiﬁ cation 
 Once we have two or more systems, how do we check that trading these two systems 
actually increase diversifi cation? I generally use four methods to check. 
 Daily Return Correlation 
 With this method, you simply run a correlation analysis in Excel on the daily returns 
of each system. For intraday systems, you could run the analysis on shorter time 
period bars, such as hourly. When I use daily results, I generally check the correlation 
over the entire history, and then over six‐month to one‐year periods. This analysis 
can easily be performed in Excel. I take the daily strategy results for each strategy, 
plot one as X and one as Y, and calculate the R2 correlation coeffi  cient. The lower the
correlation coeffi  cient, the better the diversifi cation. If in all cases the correlation 
is much less than 1.0, I can safely assume the correlation is low, and therefore the 
diversifi cation is high. One caveat, though: because of the fact that the longer term 
correlation is low does not mean that the systems will never be correlated. There 
could be weeks or months where the results are highly correlated. If you are aggres-
sive with position sizing, you need to be extra careful—strategies that you assume are 
not correlated can suddenly become correlated and, instead of reducing your risk, 
may actually amplify it. A good example of this occurred during the fi nancial crisis of 
2008, where heretofore uncorrelated markets and approaches suddenly all moved in 
lockstep. Diversifi cation might not help you much in periods of crisis. 
 TABLE 15.1 
 Using Correlation Measures for 
Diversification Check 
Strategy
R 2 Correlation 
Coefficient
Euro night
0.9370
Euro day
0.9745
Euro day + night
0.9817
\n\n=== PAGE 150 ===\n136
DIVERSIFICATION
 Linearity of Equity Curve 
 As I have stated previously, a perfectly linear equity curve is the ideal curve for 
a trading system. It is also a terrifi c way to measure the diversifi cation eff ect. 
All you have to do is take the strategy’s equity curve, run a linear regression
on it (which can be done in Excel), and report the correlation coeffi  cient R 2
value. An R 2 value of 1 is ideal, as it represents a perfectly linear equity curve. 
An example of this measurement is shown in Table  15.1 for the euro systems,
which are discussed in later chapters. As you can see, the R2 value for the
combined equity is better than the R 2 for each of the pieces. Thus, combining 
these strategies into one system provides diversifi cation, resulting in a smoother
equity curve.
 Maximum Drawdown
 Another way to measure the impact of diversifi cation is through the maximum draw-
down. Although trading multiple systems might not always lead to a reduced maxi-
mum drawdown, especially on an absolute basis, many times it does. This is easy to 
check if you have the equity curve for each system and the combined system. This is 
shown in Table  15.2 for the euro systems.
 In this case, the drawdown for the combined system is in between that of the euro 
day and euro night systems. This makes it a bit unclear as to whether diversifi cation 
is occurring. But once we look at reward relative to risk, the answer is clear. 
 Monte Carlo, Return/Drawdown
 Since measuring the drawdown by itself doesn’t always give a clear answer, I use 
Monte Carlo analysis to see whether the combined system is better on a risk‐adjusted
basis. I measure this by looking at the annual percentage return divided by the max
percentage drawdown. Higher values mean that I am getting more reward for my
risk. I also look at the probability of making money in a year for confi rmation. When 
I run this analysis, the results are clear (see Table  15.3 ). 
 When looking at all the analysis results, note that the conclusion is pretty obvious: 
combining the two systems produces a smoother equity curve, smaller drawdown 
 TABLE 15.2 
 Utilizing Drawdown for Diversification 
Check 
Strategy
Maximum Drawdown
Euro night
$3,008
Euro day
$3,523
Euro day + night
$3,265
\n\n=== PAGE 151 ===\n137
DIVERSIFICATION
than the worst system by itself, a better return‐to‐risk ratio, and increased probability 
of profi t. Clearly, diversifi cation made the combined system better than each of 
its parts. 
 The really nice thing about this diversifi cation technique is that it did not take any 
real mathematical eff ort to ensure that the systems were diversifi ed. By simply taking 
care to make the strategies diff erent, by some combination of diff erent entries, exits,
and other general parameters, diversifi cation was practically ensured. This might not 
always be the case, but this is true enough of the time to make it a useful and simple 
technique. 
 One fi nal benefi t of diversifi cation will help you increase the output of your strat-
egy development factory. As I have shown, two good systems became a lot better by
trading them together. Thus, it might mean that your individual system performance 
goals can be relaxed a bit, since diversifi cation will later improve the performance.
In this manner, you might be more successful creating many “decent” or “just good
enough” strategies, rather than one “super‐terrifi c” strategy. Since it is much, much 
easier to create good, but not great systems, you might get to your overall goal much
more quickly by employing diversifi cation.
 TABLE 15.3 
 Using Return/Drawdown and Probability of Profit for 
Diversification Check 
Strategy
Return/Drawdown
Probability of Profit in One Year
Euro night
2.2
89%
Euro day
5.2
97%
Euro day + night
6.7
98%
\n\n=== PAGE 152 ===\n\n\n=== PAGE 153 ===\n139
 U
p until this point I haven’t discussed position sizing or money management in any 
detail. That isn’t to say I don’t value it; I agree in large part with position‐sizing 
guru and author Ralph Vince, who states that position sizing is one of the most im-
portant things in trading. The problem is some people take that view to the extreme, 
and believe that position sizing is the only thing that matters. That is simply not true. 
Use superb position sizing with a losing strategy, and you’ll still lose in the long run. 
 Many people have written books about position sizing and money management, 
and just like with general trading books, some are good and some are bad. The best 
ones I have found include Van Tharp’s The Defi nitive Guide to Position Sizing (Van Tharp 
Institute, 2013 [2nd ed.]) and the numerous books by Ralph Vince. Vince’s books are 
more mathematically based, and tough for inexperienced traders to understand and 
follow, but the underlying messages he puts forth are usually good ones. So in this 
chapter I won’t try to recreate the wheel; I’ll instead refer you to those authors for 
more in‐depth information. In this chapter, I’ll discuss how I employ position sizing, 
both for a single system and on a portfolio level. But fi rst, I’ll share with you my 
thoughts on general position‐sizing issues. 
■ No Optimum Position Sizing
 In all my studies on position sizing, I have determined there is no optimum or one and 
only one correct way to position size, regardless of trading system. Some trading books 
out there claim that their unique method is the best, and then prove it to you through 
an example or two. This, of course, is bogus. For any given equity curve, you can try 
Position Sizing and
Money Management
g
 C H A P T E R   1 6  
\n\n=== PAGE 154 ===\n140
POSITION SIZING AND MONEY MANAGEMENT
diff erent position‐sizing models and fi nd one that is the best for that particular curve. 
But, you can’t then say that is the best way to position size for any system. A good case 
in point was a book written a while back (I will not mention the title) that developed a 
new position‐sizing method. This method basically took more risk at the start of trad-
ing and, as the account grew, scaled back the position sizing. This works great when the 
equity curve does well at the beginning, which is what most of the book’s examples 
showed. What most people don’t know is that same author applied his “superb” method 
in real time and quickly blew out numerous accounts. This was likely because his account 
started out going down instead of up. So, don’t assume that a position‐sizing method that 
works well with one trading system will work well with all trading systems. 
 
■ Risk and Reward Are a Team 
 Many people look for a magic position‐sizing technique that provides extra reward, 
without any extra risk. In general, though, reward and risk go hand in hand—if 
you want more reward, you have to be willing to risk more. Where this gets a bit 
murky is in reviewing results. Based on the return and drawdown shown in an equity 
curve, it may look like you received a lot of extra reward (return) for no extra risk 
(drawdown). But you must remember that the risk taken at the start of the trade 
won’t show up in an equity curve. The risk is there; it was just never realized. No 
matter what the fi nal results say, in the long run you’ll be better off  assuming that 
when you want more reward, you have to be willing to risk more.
 
■ Position Sizing Can Be Optimized 
 Many traders will develop a strategy, run it through all the development steps, and 
afterwards, test out 5 or 10 diff erent position‐sizing techniques, picking the best 
one. Many of these same people don’t realize that they have just optimized—not on
a particular entry or exit parameter, but instead on the position‐sizing method itself. 
Just as with optimizing trading strategies, just because one method was optimum on
past data, it does not mean it will be optimum going forward. In fact, chances are it
will not be the best. If you are dead set on testing diff erent position‐sizing techniques 
on a trading strategy, make sure you use Monte Carlo analysis. This will give you a 
much better indication as to which position‐sizing method, if any, is better.
 
■ Losing Systems Cannot Become Winners
 No matter what type of position‐sizing approach you use, if your core trading strategy 
is a loser, no position‐sizing method will save you. That is where it gets confusing,
when certain trading gurus state that position sizing is all that matters. While they 
\n\n=== PAGE 155 ===\n141
POSITION SIZING AND MONEY MANAGEMENT
are espousing the importance of position sizing, they are not saying you can win with 
a losing system. If this idea was true, you would have more rich casino gamblers out 
there. No one, to my knowledge, has ever used position sizing to succeed long term
in any casino game where they don’t have an edge. This doesn’t include cheating, or 
card counting, or any other method that gives you an advantage or edge. In those 
cases position sizing can help you immensely. If you have a terrible strategy, in the 
long run the choice of position‐sizing technique is irrelevant; you will lose no matter 
how you size. Start with a strategy that gives you an edge, then apply position sizing. 
 
■ Winning Systems Can Become Losers
 You would think that since loser trading systems cannot become winning systems 
through position sizing, the opposite is also true: winning trading systems can never 
become losers when employing position sizing. Nothing, and I mean nothing, could 
be further from the truth. It is exceedingly easy to take a winning system, apply 
an overly aggressive or inappropriate position‐sizing method, and still lose all your 
money. Over the years, I have seen many people do this. Most think that when they
have a winning system, they must push “the pedal to the metal” and trade as aggres-
sively as they can. Most of these same people crash in spectacular fashion during an
inevitable future drawdown. 
 
■ The Fantasy of Size 
 Almost every two‐bit huckster out there selling a trading system will have some sort 
of sales pitch that goes like this: “If you use my method, you can get $5,000 profi t
per contract per year. So if you trade 100 contracts—all it takes is adding a few zeros
to your order quantity—you’ll soon be making a very good living!” If you can’t im-
mediately see through the transparency of this claim, I’ll explain the fallacy. First, 
the huckster assumes you’ll have enough margin in your account to actually trade
100 contracts. If you have determined that a $10,000 account is appropriate to trade 
one contract (which, by the way, is already considered aggressive by many traders), 
then you would need a $1 million trading account. If you had that much money in 
your account, you’d probably be smart enough to never listen to the huckster’s pitch 
in the fi rst place! Remember, drawdown is always possible, and your account needs 
to consider that.
 The second fallacy in the “trade 100 contracts” scenario is that most people could 
not handle it psychologically. Sure, if the equity curve is always increasing, trad-
ing 100 contracts and banking $500,000 a year is easy. But when you have 5 losing 
trades in a row, and you lose $100,000, psychologically that could be a killer. Your 
best bet, therefore, is to ignore the hucksters and position size so that you slowly
\n\n=== PAGE 156 ===\n142
POSITION SIZING AND MONEY MANAGEMENT
add on contracts, and acclimate yourself to the dollar amounts involved before you
increase size again. 
 
■ Short Term—Go for Broke 
 If your edge is small, and you want to trade for only a very short time, just go crazy 
with position sizing. Chances are, over the short run, you probably will win. In the
long run, you’ll be toast, but in the short run you’ll be profi table. A classic example
of this is with a Martingale betting strategy. You begin by betting one coin. Every
time you lose, you double your bet (two, four, eight, etc. coins). When you eventu-
ally win, you win back all your original bets, plus $1 profi t. The interesting thing
about this approach is that if you play it just once with no bet limit, you will almost 
always make $1 (i.e., winning one betting sequence). But if you play it over and over, 
your odds of overall success go to zero because eventually there will be a betting run 
of consecutive losses you cannot recover from. Of course, betting one sequence and
then walking away is impossible for most people. Still, it is an option that is usually
successful. When you add in bet limits for Martingale, the approach becomes even 
less attractive. I know quite a few former traders who tried Martingale over the 
years; note I described them as “former.” 
 
■ No Position Sizing = No Good! 
 Whether it is fear of loss, lack of confi dence or some other issue, many people who 
have winning trading systems never position size. Instead, they continue to trade the 
same size for years. This to me is almost as bad as being too aggressive with sizing. 
When you have a winning system, you have the goose with the golden egg. Take care 
of that goose, learn what it can eat to maximize egg production, but don’t overdo it. 
After all, you need to make full use of the goose while you have it.
 
■ Strategy, Then Position Size, or Strategy 
and Position Size Together? 
 For most of my development career, I have developed the strategy fi rst, based on 
always trading a single contract. After development is completed, I then apply posi-
tion sizing. This is a good way to go, especially when your fi nal position sizing is for
a portfolio of systems. 
 Fellow trader Andrea Unger, who also trades for a living, disagrees with my 
approach. Considering that he has won the World Cup Championship of Futures 
Trading four times, I think I am safe in listening to him. His argument is as follows: 
\n\n=== PAGE 157 ===\n143
POSITION SIZING AND MONEY MANAGEMENT
when you develop a system trading a single contract, you’ll get a good system, but 
maybe not one that takes advantage of position sizing. For example, if you include 
position sizing in your development process, you are likely to end up with smaller 
losing trades, since that will allow you to trade with more contracts, leading to a higher 
net profi t. This defi nitely makes sense, based on my own experience. One of my favorite 
trading systems I developed was based on one contract being traded. Unfortunately, 
that system has relatively large losses ($2,000 to $3,000 per contract), making it tough 
to position size, unless the account is very large. Just think of the account size you need 
if you want to trade 10 contracts, where a $30,000 loss on one trade is possible. With 
a $300,000 account, one losing trade would lead to a 10 percent account loss. This is 
much too large a loss, even for the most reckless of traders. Therefore, in this case, 
maybe developing the system with position sizing would have suggested a parameter 
set where $500 maximum loss was optimum. This system would be much easier to 
apply position sizing for a smaller account. 
 So, even though I prefer not using position sizing during development, recognize 
that at least one (and probably many more) great traders do develop with position
sizing. It might be worth trying both approaches on your development projects, to 
see which one you like the best. 
 
■ Positioning Size—Single System
 Whenever I begin trading a new strategy, I almost always start at the smallest size 
possible, typically only one contract. Many people think the exact opposite; if you 
have an edge, you need to exploit it with big size as soon as possible. After all, what 
if the edge disappears? That is a good point, but in my experience, starting small is 
better. First, even with all the development, testing, and incubation, the system still
might not have an edge, even though I think it does. Trading small will limit my loss
in such a case. Second, I always become emotionally invested in strategies when
I start trading—after all, I want to see my creation succeed—so trading a small 
size takes any emotion out of the equation. This new strategy becomes just another 
strategy in my portfolio. My fi nal reason for starting small is that I want to increase
size based on the profi ts of the strategy. If the strategy makes money, it will ramp up 
in size. If it stays fl at or loses money, my downside is limited. 
 Even though I start with one contract, I always know in advance what my sizing 
scheme will be as I build equity. Most of the time, I just use fi xed fractional sizing: 
N =
N
int ( x * Equity/Largest Loss)
x
 where 
N = Integer number of contracts (always round down)
N
int = Integer function
\n\n=== PAGE 158 ===\n144
POSITION SIZING AND MONEY MANAGEMENT
x = Fraction of equity to bet on each trade
x
 
Equity = Current account equity
 Largest loss = Largest historical loss from walk‐forward back testing 
 The only variable that is at my discretion is the fi xed fraction x. Many traders will 
say that  x can be no more than .02, or some other value. While I can’t argue with
x
keeping the value of  x low, I prefer to use Monte Carlo simulation to show me the
x
best value of x, which for me is one that maximizes my return/drawdown ratio. This 
is, of course, subject to other constraints such as risk of ruin and maximum allowable
drawdown. An example will make this clearer. 
 To look at the impact of fi xed fractional sizing, I use the Monte Carlo simulation 
analysis of the euro system I will present later. I run the analysis with various values 
of the fi xed fraction  x, and look at the following charts:
 Median rate of return—I want as high as possible.
 Return/DD ratio—I want as high as possible. 
 Median max drawdown—I want this as low as possible.
 Risk of ruin—I want this as low as possible.
 Obviously, since I am trying to maximize return and minimize drawdown, there has 
to be a happy medium somewhere. This depends not only on the results but also my 
personal preferences. For instance, if I did not care what the drawdown or risk of ruin 
was, I’d select the peak point on the return or return/DD chart. This corresponds to 
x = 0.32, and also is Ralph Vince’s optimal 
x
f.   But, with x = 0.32, I’d have a 50 percent 
x
chance of having a max drawdown equal to or greater than 67.4 percent. Plus, my risk 
of ruin would be 21 percent. Wow! Those values are too high for me. But I will accept 
a 45 percent maximum drawdown and a 10 percent risk of ruin. Eliminating all chart 
points that do not meet these criteria result in a max value of  x = 0.175, as shown in
x
Figure  16.1 . Therefore, I will use this value of x in my trading for this particular system. 
x
 
■ Positioning Size—Multiple Systems 
 Since I am trading multiple systems at any one time, I have to respect any correlation 
between the results. That is, I can’t independently determine the value of x for each 
x
system, and then just trade them together. Instead, I analyze all the systems together, 
and try all values of x for each of them. Just as with the single system, I want values of 
x
x for each system (each system will indeed have a diff erent value of 
x
x) that maximizes 
x
my return/DD ratio, subject to maximum allowable drawdown and risk of ruin. An 
example of this process is shown in Figure  16.2 , where fi ve diff erent systems are
traded at the same time. The values for  x for each system maximizes the return/DD,
x
subject to the loss constraints I have chosen.
\n\n=== PAGE 159 ===\n145
POSITION SIZING AND MONEY MANAGEMENT
 FIGURE 16.1
 Single‐System Position Sizing 
1400%
1200%
1000%
800%
600%
400%
200%
0%
−2.00%
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00
Median Rate of Return
Fixed Fraction x
Fixed Fraction x
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
Median Max Drawdown
18.00
16.00
14.00
12.00
10.00
8.00
6.00
4.00
2.00
0.00
−2.00
x = 0.175, meets
drawdown and
risk-of-ruin goals
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00
Return/DD
Fixed Fraction x
Risk of Ruin
Fixed Fraction x
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
 FIGURE 16.2
 Position Sizing, Multiple Systems 
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 159 ===\n400% 418.00
s200% 46.00 a ie
E so00% 14.00 ~x= 0.175; meets:
2 12.00 |... drawdown and...
200% 2 10.00 Fisk-of-ruin goals
£ oom. E 2.00
§ 400% 2 600
3 4.00
3 200%
= 2.00
O% | 0.00 |
a | 2.00 I 1
‘00020 «0.40 «060 «0.80 100 “%00-~«020~=~C«OS~«BOSC«BDSC«O
Fixed Fraction x Fixed Fraction x
100%
20%
£ 20%
Bom <
E 0% 2
% 50% 3
2 ox :
S 30%
2 ax
10%
0% i i
000-020 «040 «0.60 080100 0.00 «020 «040 © 060 0801.00
Fixed Fraction x Fixed Fraction x

FIGURE 16.1 _Single-System Position Sizing

FIGURE 16.2 Position Sizing, Multiple Systems

145

ALNAWSIDVNYW ATNOW CNY DNIZIS NOLLISOd
\n\n=== PAGE 160 ===\n146
POSITION SIZING AND MONEY MANAGEMENT
 Obviously, I have just scratched the surface with position sizing, but I have given 
you an idea of how I approach it. As stated earlier, my philosophy is to go slow at 
fi rst and let the system profi ts generate most of the extra capital needed for position 
sizing. This helps me keep the risk at a manageable level. Since I use fi xed fractional 
sizing, you might wonder how you could employ a diff erent sizing technique in your 
analysis. Simply take what I have shown here and modify it for your sizing approach, 
and conduct the same analysis. You’ll then have a logical analysis for whatever
position‐sizing method you decide to employ.
\n\n=== PAGE 161 ===\n147
 A
s you can imagine, keeping track of all the strategies you create and run through 
this development process can quickly become a nightmare. Proper documentation 
is the key to successfully managing this eff ort. Currently, I use an Excel spreadsheet to 
manage my strategies. This is available on the book resource web site (www.wiley.com/
go/algotradingsystems) for you to download and use, and is also shown in Figures  17.1 
and  17.2 . I have set it up to identify the items I feel are the most important. Of course, 
as you progress in system development, you will likely have diff erent items you want 
to track. In that case, simply edit the spreadsheet to fi t your own needs. 
 The items I track with the spreadsheet will be discussed in this chapter. 
 
■ Trading Goals
 I list all my goals for profi t, drawdown, rate of return, number of trades, and so on. 
I fi nd it much more diffi  cult to accept systems that do not meet my goals when the 
goals are clearly written at the start! 
 
■ Trading Idea
 Here I list all the particulars of the strategy I am testing. 
Strategy name. Sounds simple, but having a unique name for every strategy helps 
you keep track of things. I use a standard naming convention, which allows me 
to easily fi nd it in my trading software’s list of strategies.
 KJD2013‐10 BrkOut A
Documenting the
Process
 C H A P T E R   1 7  
\n\n=== PAGE 162 ===\n148
DOCUMENTING THE PROCESS
FIGURE 17.1  Documenting the Development Process 
Trading Goals
Criteria
System Development Process Checklist
Completion Date
Completion Date
Completion Date
Results
Trading Idea
Strategy Name
Edge
Markets to Test
Bar Size
Historical Test Period
Market Data Streams
Market Data Customization
Entry Rules
Exit Rules
Limited Testing
Test Period
Entry Testing
Fixed Stop, Fixed Target
Fixed Bar
 Exit Testing
Similar Approach Entry
Core System Test
Monkey Testing
Random Exit
Random Entry
Random Entry & Exit
Limited Testing—Overall
Pass
Fail
Strategy—Gen Description
List All Goals
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 162 ===\n=
&

ESS

DOCUMENTING THE PROC!

‘System Development Process Checklist

Trading Goals Criteria Completion Date

List All Goals

Trading Idea Completion Date

Strategy Name

Strategy—Gen Description

Edge

Markets to Test

Bar Size

Historical Test Period
Market Data Streams

Market Data Customization

Entry Rules

Exit Rules

Limited Testing Completion Date
Test Period

Entry Testing

Fixed Stop, Fixed Target

Fixed Bar

Exit Testing

Similar Approach Entry

Core System Test

Monkey Testing

Random Entry

Random Exit

Random Entry & Exit

FIGURE 17.1 Documenting the Development Process
\n\n=== PAGE 163 ===\n149
DOCUMENTING THE PROCESS
 FIGURE 17.2  Documenting the Development Process (cont’d) 
Walk-forward Testing
Results
System Development Process Checklist
Completion Date
Pass
Pass
Pass
Pass
Pass
Results
Results
Completion Date
Completion Date
Completion Date
Fail
Fail
Fail
Fail
Fail
In Period
Out Period
Fitness Function
Anchored/Unanchored
Optimum In/Out (if applicable)
Walk-forward Historical Strategy Created
Walk-forward Testing—Overall
Monte Carlo Analysis
Start Equity
Quit Equity
Number Trades, 1 Year
Return/DD Ratio
Monte Carlo—Overall
Incubation
Meets Goals
Diversification
Meets Goals
Position Sizing
Meets Goals
Final Notes
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 163 ===\n‘System Development Process Checklist

|Walk-forward Testing Results Completion Date|

In Period

[Out Period

Fitness Function

|Anchored/Unanchored

|Optimum In/Out (if applicable)

Walk-forward Historical Strategy Created

Monte Carlo Analysis Results Completion Date|

Start Equity

Quit Equity

Number Trades, 1 Year

Return/DD Ratio

Results Completion Date|

Position Sizing

Completion Date

FIGURE 17.2 Documenting the Development Process (cont'd)

145

Ny

SSdOOUd IHL ONILNIWNIOG
\n\n=== PAGE 164 ===\n150
DOCUMENTING THE PROCESS
 where:
 KJD =  My initials—in a list of 1,000 strategies, you want to easily fi nd 
the ones you wrote. 
 2013‐10 =  Year, followed by two‐digit month. I created this strategy in 
October 2013. 
 BrkOut =  A simple description of the strategy. This example would be a
breakout strategy. 
 A = Version of strategy. If I later change or add rules, the next 
version would be “B.”  This serves a couple of purposes. First, 
it helps you keep track of how the strategy changed over time.
Second, it reminds you how many changes you made to the
strategy. If you consistently fi nd yourself testing up to version
“M,” for example, you are probably spending too much time 
revising your strategy. Remember, the risk of overfi tting goes
up with each version.
 As part of this naming, I will also add a “W” to the end if the walk‐forward ver-
sion has a diff erent code than the baseline version, and I will use “H” at the end to
signify a historical walk‐forward version of the strategy. 
Strategy—general description. In simple words, I will describe my strategy. 
Edge. What do I think my edge is? Enter it here. This is a good warning sign—if 
you do not have a clue what your edge is, you probably do not have one! 
Markets to test. List the market or markets you plan to examine.
Bar size. Enter the type of bar you are testing with. 
Historical test period. List the start and end dates for your analysis.
Market data streams. List the data identifi er you are using. For example, if I wanted
to test the continuous gold contract, in TradeStation I would use “@GC.” 
Market data customization. If you use any special session times or anything else 
unique, enter it here.
Entry rules. Describe your entry rules. You can use plain English, pseudo code, or
actual code. The idea is to archive the entry method for later reference.
Exit rules. Describe your exit rules in the same manner as your entry rules.
 
■ Limited Testing 
 Here I list all the particulars of the limited testing phase:
Test period. The one or two‐year sample of historical data that I am using to per-
form the limited testing. 
Entry testing. Here, I will record the general results (e.g., excellent, good, poor) 
for the entry testing (fi xed stop, fi xed target, and/or fi xed bar).
\n\n=== PAGE 165 ===\n151
DOCUMENTING THE PROCESS
Exit testing. Here, I will record the general results (e.g., excellent, good, poor) for
the exit testing (similar‐approach entry). 
Core system testing. General results of the whole system. 
Monkey testing. If I perform any random “monkey” testing, I will record the results here. 
Limited testing—overall. Based on all the limited tests run, does the system pass or fail? 
 
■ Walk-Forward Testing 
 Assuming the strategy passes the limited testing phase, I now move on to the walk‐
forward testing step. 
In period. The number of trading days in the in‐sample periods. 
Out period. The number of trading days in the out‐sample periods.
Fitness function. List the fi tness function used. 
Anchored/Unanchored. Identify whether you are using anchored testing or unan-
chored testing. 
Optimum in/out. If you optimize the in/out periods, identify that here, and also 
provide information on the true out‐of‐sample date range. 
Walk‐forward historical strategy created. If you create a strategy version specifi cally 
with walk‐forward history, identify it here. I signify this by putting the letter 
“H” on the end of the strategy. 
Walk‐forward testing—overall. Based on all the walk‐forward testing, does the sys-
tem pass or fail? 
 
■ Monte Carlo Testing 
 Assuming the strategy passes the walk‐forward testing phase, I now move on to the 
Monte Carlo testing step:
Start equity. Enter the starting equity you are using for the simulation. 
Quit equity. Enter the equity level below which you will quit trading the strategy. 
Number trades, 1 year. Number of trades in one year of trading.
Return/DD ratio. Enter this result from the Monte Carlo simulation.
Monte Carlo testing—overall. Based on all the Monte Carlo testing, does the system
pass or fail? 
 
■ Incubation Testing 
 Assuming the strategy passes the Monte Carlo phase, I now move on to the incuba-
tion testing step: 
Meets goals. Did the strategy pass or fail incubation? 
\n\n=== PAGE 166 ===\n152
DOCUMENTING THE PROCESS
 
■ Diversiﬁ cation Check 
 Applicable only to strategies that you plan to trade with other strategies. Was the 
current strategy developed with diversifi cation in mind? 
Meets goals. Did the strategy pass or fail diversifi cation?
 
■ Position-Sizing Check 
 Since I usually test a strategy with “one trade per contract” rules, this is an easy 
check. If, however, I used a particular position sizing during development, it should 
not be the outcome of optimization and should be identifi ed here (especially if it will 
be traded with other systems). 
Meets goals. Was the strategy developed using one contract per trade, or some
other position-sizing technique that did not involve optimization?
 
■ Final Notes
 After testing and development is completed, enter any information you feel is 
appropriate. For example, you could list the date you started trading. If the strategy 
does not pass but you like the entry or exit rules, you could always identify that fact 
here. I have had strategies that failed, but I still liked a particular aspect of it. With
the notes at the end, you can always refer to it later and easily remember, “Oh yes, I 
wanted to test this entry with soybeans, due to its high volatility.” 
 
■ One Final List
 The individual sheets provide an excellent way to manage each strategy. In addition, 
I also keep a list of entry and exit ideas. These might not be fully formed strate-
gies, but they are ideas I can take and later use in a strategy. For example, if I see an 
intriguing entry idea in a book or trading magazine, and I cannot immediately test
it, I’ll just add it to my entry list. This list serves two purposes. First, it functions as
an idea manager, saving any idea you have for future testing. Second, having this list 
means you will never run out of ideas to test. Trust me, the list will grow far faster
than you can test! 
\n\n=== PAGE 167 ===\n Creating a
System 
 PA R T  I V 
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 167 ===\nPann

CREATING A
SYSTEM
\n\n=== PAGE 168 ===\n\n\n=== PAGE 169 ===\n155
N
ow that I’ve walked you through the strategy development process I use, I think 
it will be instructive and informative for me to walk you through the develop-
ment of two strategies I created in March 2013 and started real‐money trading in 
August 2013. If you go to the web site (www.wiley.com/go/algotradingsystems) 
you will see updates for these strategies, assuming I am still trading them, or a post‐
mortem analysis if I decide to stop trading them. 
 The next chapters will walk you through the process, and after that Chapter  24 
will give running commentary and updates as I trade it live. 
 
■ Developing a New Strategy 
 As with all new trading strategies, fi rst I start out with a SMART goal:
 “I want to create a trading system for the euro currency that is an intraday strat-
egy that can earn 50 percent annual return with a median maximum drawdown 
(determined by Monte Carlo simulation) of 25 percent or less, which is a return to 
drawdown ratio of 2.0 or better. The system (which may include more than one in-
dependent strategy) should make money on 55 percent or more of the days it trades. 
This trading system will take no more than two trades per day. I will give myself one 
month of development to complete this task (end of March 2013), and if I do not 
have a system at that time, I will move on to the next idea.” 
 Goals, Initial and
Walk‐Forward
Testing
 C H A P T E R   1 8  
\n\n=== PAGE 170 ===\n156
GOALS, INITIAL AND WALK‐FORWARD TESTING
 Is this goal suffi  cient for a SMART goal? Let’s take a look:
Specifi c.
S
 Intraday euro strategy, with specifi c performance goals. Yes, it is specifi c. 
In fact, it may be too specifi c—it is a pretty long goal statement.
Measurable.
M
 50 percent annual return, less than 25 percent drawdown, return/
drawdown ratio greater than 2.0, 55 percent winning days. Yes, it will easy to 
measure performance against these benchmarks.
Attainable. 50 percent annual return, less than 25 percent drawdown, return/
drawdown ratio greater than 2.0. When I fi rst started developing systems, 
these goals were very ambitious. It turns out that developing a strategy the cor-
rect way is pretty diffi  cult. Many people will scoff  at these numbers, since they
seem small compared to what a decent optimized strategy looks like. Remem-
ber, though, that a great‐looking back test does not always mean too much. So,
yes, the goals here are attainable. The toughest part will be making the system 
an intraday strategy.
Relevant. Everything in my goal statement relates to development of this system. 
Yes, it is relevant.
Time bound.
T
 Since I limit myself to one month of development time, this is a 
time‐bound goal. This time limit will also prevent me from making too many 
changes to a decent strategy, which will prevent overfi tting and other bad de-
velopment habits. 
 Once I had the SMART goal identifi ed, I could proceed to developing my trading 
idea. 
 From past development experience, I know that intraday systems are diffi  cult to 
develop, much more so than a longer‐term swing system. The best intraday systems, 
in my experience, are those that trade infrequently and tend to ride winners (trends) 
as long as possible. That leads me in the direction of a strategy that cuts losses rela-
tively quickly, but keeps winners until the end of the day. To get the biggest bang for
the buck, then, this system should trade during the U.S. day session, as many of the 
big moves occur during this very liquid time period. The problem with this approach 
is that a system with many small losses and a few big winners will inevitably have a 
low winning percentage. To counteract this, I will likely need another strategy, one 
that has small winners, larger losers, and a high winning percentage.
 As you can see, just thinking about the kind of system I want really helped me 
fi gure out the best way to proceed. After some more thought, I ended up with the 
following: 
 Create two strategies for the euro currency, using continuous contract @EC:
Strategy 1: Nighttime strategy “euro night.” Runs on 105‐minute bars, from 6 
”
p.m. ET to 
7  a.m. ET. All trades are exited by 7  a.m. , so they do not interfere with strategy
2. This strategy will focus on small wins, larger losses, and will initiate trades only 
until 1  a.m . ET (I have to sleep sometime, in case I do not automate this strategy). 
\n\n=== PAGE 171 ===\n157
GOALS, INITIAL AND WALK‐FORWARD TESTING
Strategy 2: Daytime strategy “euro day.” Runs on 60‐minute bars from 7 
”
a.m. to 3 p.m.
ET, with all trades exited by 3 p.m. The end of the trading day is 5  p.m. , but I 
am closing all trades at 3 p.m. , since trading volume is a lot less from 3  p.m. to 
5  p.m . 
 For the test period, since I am using small bars, I will test back only to January 1, 
2009. Typically, for swing systems I use 5 to 10 years of historical data, which means
this is a slightly diff erent approach for me. This also avoids my having to test during
the 2008 fi nancial crisis, which would likely make development tougher. So note
that, in a way, I am taking some shortcuts with this strategy development, since I am
(1) using only about 4 years of historical data, and (2) avoiding a major market event.
I realize that these shortcuts will lead to a system that is not as robust as it could be, 
but that is a sacrifi ce I am willing to accept. Strategy development is full of these 
trade‐off s, and there is not always a correct way to resolve them. Sometimes you just 
have to try and see what happens, and that is what I am doing here.
 Now that I have the preliminary information established, I can go ahead with the 
entry and exit rules. I’ll start with the exit rules, since those will be relatively fi xed,
compared to the entries. For both strategies, I want to lose no more than $450 per
trade, after slippage and commission of $17.50 per trade. This equates to a loss of 34
ticks. When I go to detailed development, I will allow this stop amount to be lower
than 34 ticks, but never more. 
 For profi t, with both strategies I will allow the profi t target to be optimized for 
euro night strategy, and fi xed at $5,000 for the euro day strategy. Since there has
never been a $5,000 intraday move in euro, the $5,000 limit is eff ectively saying, 
“Go for as much profi t as you can, and hold until the end of the trading session.” 
 The fi nal exit for both strategies will be to close all open trades at the end of the 
session. This will be a rigid exit, with no optimization needed. 
 With the simple exits fi rmly established, the trick to making these strategies suc-
cessful will lie in the entries. After some cursory examination and testing, it became
apparent that reversal‐type entries would be the best thing for both strategies. With
a reversal entry, an example of which is shown in Figure  18.1 , the idea is to catch an 
excursion up or down, before it stops and reverses. This makes these strategies a type 
of mean reversion, since you are entering against a trend and banking on its reversing 
before turning into a trend in the opposing direction. 
 For strategy 1, the euro night strategy, the long entry is based on the average high 
of the previous X bars, reduced by a multiplier of the average true range. Of course, 
the exact opposite entry is true for a short entry. See Figure  18.1 .
 For strategy 2, the euro day strategy, when a highest high of the past Y bars is hit, 
and the X bar momentum is down, then a limit order to sell short will be placed Z 
ticks above the current high. The opposite logic holds for long trades. Thus, to get
fi lled, the strategy is planning on one more price thrust before the price reverses. An 
example entry is shown in Figure  18.2 .
\n\n=== PAGE 172 ===\n158
GOALS, INITIAL AND WALK‐FORWARD TESTING
 What do I think my edge actually is? Based on the reversal entries I am employing, 
I feel my edge is in identifying very‐short‐term (for night strategy 1) and medium‐
term (for day strategy 2) areas where the price is likely to reverse. By having limit
orders away from the current market, I liken my edge to a rubber band. It keeps 
stretching and stretching until I get my limit fi ll, then it bounces back, giving me 
profi t. Of course, if the rubber band keeps stretching after my order is fi lled, that 
means my premise was wrong, and I pay the price with a full stop‐loss or a loss at the 
end of the trading session. 
 FIGURE 18.1
 Reversal Entry Example
Sell short in
uptrend,
expecting a
reversal
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 172 ===\na

GOALS, INITIAL AND WALK-FORWARD TESTING

SA] @ECZ13 - 105 min CME L=1.3454 0.0026 0.19% B=1.3454 A=1.345 [4 a469
! ! hee

i i EpLimit-S

f i i+ { 1.3450
H Sell short in

t uptrend, we. identi
H expecting a

i reversal as 1.3430

| y :

- ; + 1.3380
: f
i i
i 1.3370
i i
* é t t 1.3360
i
t ‘ :
plimit-L 4 : ! 1.3360
1 i i

¥ T, T
14/11 8:00 11/12 8:00 11/13 8:00 11/14
Croce with TradeStation, CTradoStaton Technlogis, Ine. Al ighs reserved

FIGURE 18.1 Reversal Entry Example

What do I think my edge actually is? Based on the reversal entries I am employing,
I feel my edge is in identifying very-short-term (for night strategy 1) and medium-
term (for day strategy 2) areas where the price is likely to reverse. By having limit
orders away from the current market, I liken my edge to a rubber band. It keeps
stretching and stretching until I get my limit fill, then it bounces back, giving me
profit. Of course, if the rubber band keeps stretching after my order is filled, that
means my premise was wrong, and I pay the price with a full stop-loss or a loss at the
end of the trading session.
\n\n=== PAGE 173 ===\n159
GOALS, INITIAL AND WALK‐FORWARD TESTING
 FIGURE 18.2
 Euro Day Strategy Entry Example 
Buy expecting
reversal
0
End-of-day exit
0
End-of-day exit
Buy
1.3400
1.3380
1.3360
1.3340
1.3320
1.3300
1.3280
1.3260
1.3240
1.3220
8/19
8/16
8/15
8/14
8/13
8/12
8/9
8/8
8/7
Created with TradeStation. ©TradeStation Technologies, Inc. All rights reserved.
1
Buy
1
 With all the basic structure of the strategy, along with the entry and exit in place, 
I can now start the preliminary testing. 
 
■Limited Testing 
 For limited testing, I chose to look at the results for just 2009. Since my full‐size test 
will be 2009–present, I am using about 25 percent of the data to do my initial tests. 
This will give me a good indication of whether my strategy is viable. Remember,
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 173 ===\na
ray

GOALS, INITIAL AND WALK-FORWARD TESTING

S
g
g
a
z s
: 6
A 3
3 oar D>
< ©} EI
3 a g
% 5 5
ay 0 6 x
a 33 =
# 5 on
Ey 2
2 +e fz 5
S = a) = a
2 oe g) 6 a
8 4 3g
s 2 3) & S
8 3 i] 2 5 ey
4 i orn
ba Ss
2 a 5 3s
i 2 2 5 2
na - & 3S
¥ 2 o >
a 26
Q 4 Bs
< $ a Z 8
—_— 7
3 @ a are
5 = “| 22
g
3 ~ |2 44
2 a ee Seen Sewers ca ee es a ae A as er
S =—— S |g 25
_—— =?
$s SS i] aos
SEE E = 6
fe ee
Ss
g
8

ing

ited Testi

imit

aL

For limited testing, I chose to look at the results for just 2009. Since my full-size test

will be 2009—present, I am using about 25 percent of the data to do my initial tests.

This will give me a good indication of whether my strategy is viable, Remember,
\n\n=== PAGE 174 ===\n160
GOALS, INITIAL AND WALK‐FORWARD TESTING
with these tests I am looking for a general indication that my entries, exits, and en-
tries and exits combined are working well. 
Entry test—fi xed‐stop and target. The results of this test, and all other limited tests 
are shown in Table  18.1 . All results are acceptable, which allows me to proceed to 
the in‐depth testing phase. 
Entry test—fi xed‐bar exit. The results look good and lead me to think I possibly have
some sort of edge here with my entry.
Exit test—similar‐approach entry. To test the exit, I created an entry condition similar in 
style (mean‐reverting limit order) to the one I am using. If the results are good, it gives 
me just a bit more confi dence in the exit I have chosen. Results do indeed look good.
Core system test. This test is a gentle optimization of the whole system, with entry 
and exit conditions working together. Results show that the system performs pretty 
well and is acceptable for further investigation. 
Monkey testing. This random testing can be very useful it certain situations. Other 
times, it really doesn’t provide any additional information. Such is the case here.
Limited testing summary. Both strategies passed all the tests I ran, so the strategies
can proceed further through the process. Note that this is the exception, not the 
rule. Most times, the results will be so poor that no further testing is required, and 
you can simply move on to the next idea. In a minority of situations, the results will 
be so‐so, and you may add a rule or fi lter to get better results. In very rare cases,
strategies will be acceptable the fi rst time through, which is what happened here.
As you develop experience creating and testing ideas, you will fi nd that more and 
more of your strategies fall into this third category. At the start of your development
 TABLE 18.1 Limited Testing Summary, Euro Day and Night System 
Euro Night
Euro Day
Entry Test—Fixed‐Stop
and Target
82% of optimizations 
profitable
76% of optimizations 
profitable
Entry Test—Fixed‐Bar
Exit
Exit after one to
five bars >> good
Exit after one to five bars 
>> good
Exit Test—Similar‐
Approach Entry
Generic mean reversion limit 
order entry >> acceptable
Generic mean reversion limit 
order entry >> acceptable
Core System Test
85% of optimizations 
profitable
81% of optimizations 
profitable
Monkey Testing
Entry better than random
Entry better than random
Exit better than random
Exit better than random
\n\n=== PAGE 175 ===\n161
GOALS, INITIAL AND WALK‐FORWARD TESTING
journey, though, plan on discarding a lot of garbage strategies and adding rules and
conditions to most of the rest. 
 
■Walk-Forward Testing 
 With the limited testing complete, I can now proceed to the detailed walk‐forward 
testing. This consists of running a full optimization, and then running through the 
walk‐forward analysis. Figure  18.3 shows the process.
 FIGURE 18.3
 Walk‐Forward  Testing, Euro Day and Night Strategy 
Optimization—Euro Day
Whole dataset
Xb = 3−5
Xb2 = 70−80
Pipadd = 2−11
Stoplo = 225−425
Run walk-forward analysis
Generate code for
walk-forward strategy
Optimization—Euro Night
Whole dataset
Nb = 9−19
NATR = 73−93
ATRmult = 2.55−3.15
TRmult = .51−.71
Stoplo = 375−425
Final Result—Euro Night
Final Result—Euro Day
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 175 ===\njourney, though, plan on discarding a lot of garbage strategies and adding rules and
conditions to most of the rest.

| Walk-Forward Testing

With the limited testing complete, I can now proceed to the detailed walk-forward
testing. This consists of running a full optimization, and then running through the
walk-forward analysis. Figure 18.3 shows the process,

Optimization—Euro Night
Whole dataset

Optimization—Euro Day

Nb = 9-19 Whole dataset

NATR = 73-93 Xb =3-5
Xb2 = 70-80
Pipadd = 2-11

Stoplo = 225-425

Run walk-forward analysis
Generate code for
walk-forward strategy

Final Result—Euro Day

FIGURE 18.3 Walk-Forward Testing, Euro Day and Night Strategy

5

ONILSAL (UVMYOd-ATVM CNY TVLLINI ‘STVOD
\n\n=== PAGE 176 ===\n\n\n=== PAGE 177 ===\n163
 W
ith the walk‐forward testing complete, based on the results I am confi dent I 
have a viable strategy. The equity curve for walk‐forward testing looks nice, 
but at the same time I realize that there is no possible way the future equity curve 
will look exactly like the past equity curve. My hope, and the hope of all developers 
at this stage, is that the components of the equity curve (i.e., individual trades) are 
roughly the same as the walk‐forward history. The easiest way to imagine this is to 
think about the average trade profi t and its standard deviation (scatter). If either of 
these values signifi cantly changes, the system might fail in the future. If, for example, 
the average trade turns negative, future performance will obviously be negative. 
Similarly, if the standard deviation increases, the drawdowns will likely be much 
more severe, the system will be harder to trade with position sizing, and the result-
ing equity curve will probably give you more ulcers.
 Assuming, then, that the walk‐forward trade performance will continue in the 
future, it becomes useful to see how the future performance might vary over time. 
For this analysis, I simulate one year’s worth of trades with Monte Carlo analysis. 
 
■ Euro Day Strategy 
 As previously discussed in Chapter  7 , the only information required to do a simple 
Monte Carlo analysis is: 
 
■ Starting equity
 
■ Quitting‐point equity 
Monte Carlo Testing
and Incubation 
 C H A P T E R   1 9  
\n\n=== PAGE 178 ===\n164
MONTE CARLO TESTING AND INCUBATION
 
■ Number of trades in one year
 
■ Individual trade results
 For any simulations that you run, you might want to simulate more than one 
year’s worth of trades, or you might want to include position sizing, or you may even 
want to eliminate the quitting‐point equity—the point at which you stop trading. 
These particulars will be something you develop over time, as you determine what
you like and don’t like in the simulation. The exact method I use may not suit you, 
and that is fi ne. 
 Once I have all the inputs for the Monte Carlo simulation, I simply enter them in 
the spreadsheet and press the “Calculate” button. Results are as shown in Figure  19.1 . 
For the day strategy, if I keep the risk of ruin below 10 percent (my personal thresh-
old for ruin), I fi nd I need $6,250 to begin trading this system, and in an “average” 
year I can expect: 
 23.7 percent maximum drawdown
 129 percent return 
 5.45 return/drawdown ratio 
 Other points of interest are that I have a 4 percent chance of ruin in that fi rst year, 
where my equity would drop below $3,000. I also have a 94 percent probability of 
making money in that fi rst year (i.e., ending the year with more than $6,250).
 Based on my goals and objectives, all of these parameters are acceptable, and I 
consider the Monte Carlo simulation results successful. Note that, based on your
goals and objectives, this system—with the $6,250 starting equity—may not be 
good enough for you. For example, many people want a near 0 percent chance of 
risk of ruin. Others may feel that 25.5 percent maximum drawdown is too high. The 
point is that what is right for me might not be right for you. That is why I think it is
so important that you come up with your own goals and objectives. In the end, you
need to feel comfortable trading what you have developed, and trading something
that does not fi t you is a sure recipe for disaster.
 
■ Euro Night Strategy
 Now, I will perform the exact same procedure on the euro night strategy. Results are 
as shown in Figure  19.2 . For the night strategy, if I again keep the risk of ruin below 
10 percent, I fi nd I need $6,250 to begin trading this system, and in an “average” year
I can expect: 
 25.0 percent maximum drawdown
 52 percent return
 2.0 return/drawdown ratio
\n\n=== PAGE 179 ===\n165
 FIGURE 19.1  Monte Carlo Results, Euro Day Strategy 
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 179 ===\nGoreng eq ong ‘synsoy opey UO ET RUNDLE

cco'ors

‘yada vers
cages

165
\n\n=== PAGE 180 ===\n166
 FIGURE 19.2 Monte Carlo Results, Euro Night Strategy 
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 180 ===\nGoreng wSIN omy ‘syMsoY ope] AUOW _Z"6T AANDLA

‘uumey Jo vey yenuuny

%0

OL
KOZ
‘KOE
‘Or
0s
‘%09
OL

si1ns3y
JOVEINWIS OLED BU0W

166
\n\n=== PAGE 181 ===\n167
MONTE CARLO TESTING AND INCUBATION
 Other points of interest are that I have a 6 percent chance of ruin in that fi rst year, 
where my equity would drop below $3,000. I also have an 85 percent probability of 
making money in that fi rst year (i.e., ending the year with more than $6,250).
 Note that this strategy is nowhere near as good as the euro day strategy. I expected 
this because of the goals of the night strategy. If you will recall, I was looking for a 
higher winning percentage strategy here, not one with necessarily a lot of profi t.
Even so, the night strategy by itself meets my goals, although the return/drawdown 
ratio of only 2.0 is on the low end of acceptability. But since it meets my criteria, I 
can proceed to the fi nal Monte Carlo step.
 
■Euro Day and Night Strategy
 While it is nice to know that either strategy, by itself, meets my performance 
criteria, what really matters to me is how the combined day and night strategy 
performs. Before I perform the Monte Carlo analysis, however, I have to do some 
data manipulation. In the previous simulations, I used individual trades for the inputs, 
which worked fi ne. But with the combined strategy, how do I ensure that the correct 
ratio and distribution of trades is taken to refl ect what really occurs when I trade 
both strategies together? Some days, only one strategy will trade, and on other days, 
both strategies will trade. I want to preserve this with the combined simulation. 
 The solution to combining strategies into one strategy is to use the daily results, 
instead of the individual trade results. Then the net results on a given day will be 
considered as the results of one system. An example of how that works is shown in
the “Combined” column of  Table  19.1 .
 By utilizing this technique, we have preserved the characteristics of each strategy’s 
trades, and just combined them into daily trades. A similar approach can be used to 
combine any two or more systems into one strategy. Simply compile results into
daily results, and use that in the simulation. 
 Once I have the trade data compiled into daily results, I can perform the Monte 
Carlo analysis on the combined euro day and night strategy. Results are as shown 
in Figure  19.3 . For the combined strategy, if I again keep the risk of ruin below
 TABLE 19.1  Combine Daily Results on Multiple Systems to Get
“One” Combined System
Date
Euro Day
Euro Night
Combined
9/9/2013
+$100
+$100
9/10/2013
+$600
+$600
9/11/2013
+$100
+$250
+$350
9/12/2013
−$400
−$50
−$450
9/13/2013
+$100
+$100
\n\n=== PAGE 182 ===\n168
 FIGURE 19.3 Monte Carlo Results, Both Strategies Combined 
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 182 ===\npourquioy sofneng yiog ‘synsoy opey aUoW EET TUNA

Aynb3 yeas
‘coders

Fanta ues
ooo ors coo'ss

wnopmeig / wRayjO BEY eMUUy

si1ns3y
JOVEINWIS OLED BU0W

168
\n\n=== PAGE 183 ===\n169
MONTE CARLO TESTING AND INCUBATION
10 percent, I fi nd I need $6,250 to begin trading this system, and in an
“average” year I can expect:
 25.8 percent maximum drawdown
 176 percent return
 6.6 return/drawdown ratio 
 Other points of interest are that I have a 5 percent chance of ruin in 
that fi rst year, where my equity would drop below $3,000. I also have a
95 percent probability of making money in that fi rst year (i.e., ending 
the year with more than $6,250). 
 The most interesting aspect of this combined analysis is that the 
combined system is better than each system by itself. I’ll repeat 
that: the combined system is better than each by itself. This is due to the
diversifi cation eff ect, which I discussed in Chapter  15 . The return‐
to‐drawdown ratio, my primary metric in Monte Carlo analysis, 
increases from 5.5 to 6.6, which is a considerable increase. This is 
because by trading both systems, I get the combined return of the 
strategies, but on the downside the drawdowns do not combine. 
Rather, when one strategy is experiencing a drawdown, the other 
might be hitting new equity highs (or at least not new maximum 
drawdowns). Diversifi cation, by trading uncorrelated strategies, is 
what makes this possible. 
 Looking at the Monte Carlo analysis as a whole, all my performance 
goals and objectives are met for the combined system. Therefore, I
consider this analysis a “pass” and can now proceed to the next step: 
incubation. 
 
■ Incubation
 At this point, I have 3.5 or so years of walk‐forward back‐test 
history. On top of that, I have about 5 months of  “incubation” 
results, watching the euro day and night systems perform real time, 
with no changes to the original code (other than regularly scheduled 
reoptimizations).
 Walk‐forward results: July 2009–March 2013
 Incubation results: March 2013–August 2013
 If the incubation results of the last 5 months “look” similar to the 
walk-forward results, I should feel comfortable going live with the 
strategy. 
\n\n=== PAGE 184 ===\n170
MONTE CARLO TESTING AND INCUBATION
 
■ Are Results Similar? 
 Here is how I determine if incubation and walk‐forward data “match.” Keep in mind 
that I am not a statistician, so I tend to keep things simple, at the risk of not being
100 percent mathematically and scientifi cally rigorous. What I do passes a common‐
sense test, though. I use three methods to check for a match: 
 1.  Student’s t distribution test.  This statistical test will tell you if two data groups (the walk‐
forward results and the incubation results) are signifi cantly diff erent from each other. 
 You can pretty easily do this in Excel (with the TTest function), or you can 
fi nd on online t‐test by searching with Google.
 When I run this test, it tells me that there is a 56 percent chance that these 
distributions are not diff erent. This gives me reasonable assurance that the strat-
egies are performing in real time as they did historically. If, however, the chances 
of the strategies being diff erent were 0 to 20 percent, I might seriously wonder 
if I made a testing development mistake.
 2.  Data distribution comparison. I create two histograms of the data. The fi rst one is 
the actual data, and I lay the walk‐forward and the incubation results on top of 
each other. Do they look like they overlap? The second chart plots a theoretical
normal curve histogram, based on the mean and standard deviation. I see a good 
amount of overlap in Figure  19.4 .
 FIGURE 19.4  Incubation Results—Data Distribution Comparison 
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 184 ===\nMONTE CARLO TESTING AND INCUBATION | =

qa
Ss

| Are Results Similar?

Here is how I determine if incubation and walk-forward data “match.” Keep in mind

that I am not a statistician, so I tend to keep things simple, at the risk of not being

100 percent mathematically and scientifically rigorous. What I do passes a common-

sense test, though. I use three methods to check for a match:

1.

Student's t distribution test. This statistical test will tell you if two data groups (the walk-
forward results and the incubation results) are significantly different from each other.

You can pretty easily do this in Excel (with the TTest function), or you can
find on online t-test by searching with Google.

When I run this test, it tells me that there is a 56 percent chance that these

distributions are not different. This gives me reasonable assurance that the strat-
egies are performing in real time as they did historically, If, however, the chances
of the strategies being different were 0 to 20 percent, I might seriously wonder
if I made a testing development mistake.
Data distribution comparison. | create two histograms of the data. The first one is
the actual data, and I lay the walk-forward and the incubation results on top of
each other. Do they look like they overlap? The second chart plots a theoretical
normal curve histogram, based on the mean and standard deviation. I see a good
amount of overlap in Figure 19.4.

Data distributions = Walkforward
are very close to ‘=~ Incubation
each other,

suggesting that + =

walkforward and
incubation results
are from same
population

-$1,500 -$1,000 -$500 $0 $500 $1,000 $1,500
Trade Result

FIGURE 19.4 Incubation Results—Data Distribution Comparison
\n\n=== PAGE 185 ===\n171
MONTE CARLO TESTING AND INCUBATION
 3.  Equity curve comparison. This is my favorite method, but it is not very scientifi c or 
mathematical. I simply plot all the data and create an equity curve. When I do 
that, can I see where the walk‐forward ends and incubation begins? If I can, that
suggests something happened when incubation started, and that is usually a bad
thing. If you wonder about this method, just create a strategy with optimized pa-
rameters, and then let it run live for a while. Most times, you’ll notice a change 
in the curve. I do not see a radical change in the incubation portion of the curve, 
shown in Figure  19.5 . This is a good sign! 
 Based on this analysis, I’d say the system is performing in incubation the same as it 
performed in its walk‐forward test. In fact, incubation is better than walk‐forward, which 
does concern me a bit (usually it is the other way around). But it is close enough to give me 
confi dence that I did not screw up during testing in development. It does not guarantee 
that when I go live, the system will be profi table—that is important to remember. 
 
■Final Information 
 Once all the tests are complete, I can make a decision on whether to proceed with 
trading the system. Even if the strategy passes all the development steps, I still might 
decide not to trade it. Position sizing and correlation with other strategies are two 
possible reasons I might decide not to trade a specifi c strategy.
 FIGURE 19.5
 Incubation Results—Equity Curve Comparison 
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 185 ===\n$5000
$40,000 4p
— Walter’
Incubation |
$20,000
”
wee
$10,000 d
W
hen
all
sot
ordpes —o1zaro —oeviond—oaaeni —oariant © oaotin2 —on2 © osomNS = 11/aRN3
-$10000
bate

FIGURE 19.5 _ Incubation Results—Equity Curve Comparison

3. Equity curve comparison. This is my favorite method, but it is not very scientific or
mathematical. I simply plot all the data and create an equity curve. When I do
that, can I see where the walk-forward ends and incubation begins? If I can, that
suggests something happened when incubation started, and that is usually a bad
thing. If you wonder about this method, just create a strategy with optimized pa-
rameters, and then let it run live for a while. Most times, you’ll notice a change
in the curve. I do not see a radical change in the incubation portion of the curve,
shown in Figure 19.5. This is a good sign!

Based on this analysis, I'd say the system is performing in incubation the same as it
performed in its walk-forward test. In fact, incubation is better than walk-forward, which
does concern me a bit (usually it is the other way around), But it is close enough to give me
confidence that I did not screw up during testing in development. It does not guarantee

that when I go live, the system will be profitable—that is important to remember.

| Final Information

Once all the tests are complete, I can make a decision on whether to proceed with
trading the system. Even if the strategy passes all the development steps, I still might
decide not to trade it. Position sizing and correlation with other strategies are two
possible reasons I might decide not to trade a specific strategy.

=!

NOLLVSNONI ANY DNILSIL OTAVO TLNOW
\n\n=== PAGE 186 ===\n172
MONTE CARLO TESTING AND INCUBATION
 
■ Position Sizing
 Although I discussed position sizing in more detail in Chapter  16 , I did not design 
the strategy specifi cally for any position sizing method. Of course, it is an important
item to think about before I start trading with real money. A strategy can be great, 
but if reasonable position sizing cannot be applied to it, it just may not be worth trad-
ing with real money. This can occur when single contract losses are too big, and the 
account size needed to trade the strategy is prohibitively large.
 An example of this is a system very similar to one I developed and have been trading 
for a number of years. This system wins $5,000 per contract on 50 percent of trades, and 
loses $3,000 per contract on the other 50 percent. The average profi t/loss per trade is 
therefore $1,000, and the Tharp expectancy is 0.33, which is indicative of a pretty good 
system. But how much money do you need to trade such a system? Assuming the strategy 
trades 20 times per year, and the quitting equity point is $3,000, you need a $20,000 
account to have only a 6 percent chance of ruin. Plus, your maximum drawdown is 
likely to be 33 percent. That is just too much for many of us. To get a drawdown below 
25 percent, one would need a $35,000 account. This probably puts this system out of 
reach for most traders. Remember, this is trading only one contract. Using any kind of 
position sizing will make these drawdown and ruin numbers much worse. Thus, in your 
development process you may end up with a profi table system that you just can’t trade. 
 
■ Correlation with Other Strategies 
 Before I start trading a strategy live, I always check the performance of the new system 
with systems I am already trading. I run a simple correlation of daily returns. This 
will tell me if the new strategy is highly correlated to any of my existing strategies. 
Obviously, trading two strategies that are highly correlated isn’t a good idea unless 
you cut the position sizing of each in half. Otherwise, you may end up with too much 
exposure in a particular market or to a particular trading style. Many times, for 
strategies developed independently, this is not an issue, but it is always good to check.
 
■ Monte Carlo—Consistency 
 One of the interesting side benefi ts of performing Monte Carlo analysis is that you 
can get an idea of your profi t consistency. Imagine you were manager of a casino. 
Over the course of fi ve minutes, your casino might make or lose money at the gam-
bling tables. There is some randomness to the results, so even the house could lose 
money in a given short time frame. As the time increases, your chances of profi tabil-
ity go up, and eventually approach near certainty. Your casino probably makes money
\n\n=== PAGE 187 ===\n173
MONTE CARLO TESTING AND INCUBATION
every week and almost certainly makes money every month—unless, of course, the 
criminal underworld is skimming from you! 
 The concept of a casino got me thinking that I’d really like to be profi table over 
a week, month, or year with my trading systems. Obviously, that is a function of 
my “roulette wheel”—my trading system and how much of an edge it provides. If I 
assume that my historical results will match my future results, I can use the Monte 
Carlo analysis to determine my odds of profi tability. From that number, I can deter-
mine how consistently profi table I am over any given time period.
 Using this idea, I ran the analysis on my euro day and night system. Before I re-
veal the results, keep in mind that this system on average will generate $10,000 to 
$12,000 profi t per year. It is a pretty good system. But will it provide a steady return 
stream? Here is what the results show: 
 
■Weekly —59.6 percent of weeks should be profi table. So, within one year’s time, I
y
should make money 31 weeks and lose money 21 weeks. That’s okay, but not re-
ally a great way to try to make a living. 
 
■Monthly —74.8 percent of months should be profi table. In one year, three months
y
will be down months. Again, not very steady returns—what if all three down 
months came in a row? 
 
■Quarterly —86.2 percent of quarters should be profi table. I like that.
y
 
■Yearly —98.8 percent of years should be profi table. One losing year in a 30‐ to
y
40‐year trading career. That is very nice. The analysis says if I can live with the 
weekly and monthly uncertainty, then I’ll be rewarded almost every year with at 
least some profi t.
 Obviously, before I ran this analysis I had to make some simplifying assumptions. 
For example, on average there are 151 trades per year in my trading system. That 
equates to three trades per week, on average. However, the actual number in any
week could be zero, fi ve, or anywhere in between. Forcing it to be three every week 
leads to some error. But I don’t think it would change the results by much. If I am
looking for 90 percent of my weeks to be profi table, then my strategy obviously 
won’t cut it, regardless of the assumptions I made.
 The next obvious question is: “What numbers should I require for each time pe-
riod?”  That will depend on the trader and his goals and objectives. A trader used to 
living paycheck to paycheck may require 95 percent winning weeks, or three losing
weeks per year. He might know that more losing weeks than that will lead to eviction. 
A professional Commodity Trading Advisor (CTA) is measured on a monthly basis, 
so she might desire 95 percent of months to be profi table. A longer‐term trader,
though, might care only about winning quarters or winning years. It all depends on 
the trader’s circumstances. 
\n\n=== PAGE 188 ===\n174
MONTE CARLO TESTING AND INCUBATION
 To take the whole analysis a step further, as you add good systems to your port-
folio, your chances for profi table periods goes up. Sort of like the casino adding new
table games to complement the roulette wheel. 
 
■ Eliminating Big Days 
 Eliminating the outlier trades from the history makes a huge diff erence in the results. 
In the history, there are 614 trading days represented. There are 20 days of profi ts
greater than $1,000. In one year of trading, I’d expect to see 5 of those “big” days. 
If they don’t come, the system on average becomes only slightly profi table. My 
conclusion is that I am in deep trouble without those big winning days. The question
is: is there a reason why I should not expect these kinds of days in the future? Maybe
my system rules and variables basically were curve fi t to fi nd these big trades. With 
10 to 20 big trades, I suppose that is a distinct possibility. However, it is not like these 
trades are due to a data anomaly or some back-test issue. Strategy 2 (euro day) was 
specifi cally set up to let profi ts run, and not to cap it. If I saw only a handful of large‐
profi t trades, I might suspect some sort of data or back‐test issue.
 One other interesting question: since I am relying on these “outliers” to generate 
most of the profi t, how likely is it that I even see many of them in a given year?
 
■ Outlier Days
 Since I know that the performance of my system is going to be driven by large‐
winning trades (outliers), it is interesting to see how many of these I could expect in 
a trading year. Here’s what I found:
 
■ In a year’s time, I am likely to see four to six large‐winning trades. That is only one 
large‐winning trade every other month!
 
■ There is less than a 10 percent (actually, 6.6 percent) chance of seeing eight or 
more large‐winning trades in a year. 
 
■ There is a 13.6 percent chance that I will have only zero, one, or two big winners 
in a year’s time. 
 This analysis is a bit sobering, and it does make one thing crystal clear: if I am to 
succeed with this system, I have to take every single trade because the one I miss just 
may be the big winner that only comes around once a year. 
 Based on this data, my expectation for the system is a lot of fl at to slightly up or 
slightly down periods, punctuated by a large winner every once in a while. Why is 
this important to know? Having proper expectations is crucial to long‐term success.
I can’t get discouraged or lose confi dence in the system when I am not immediately 
making money. Knowing what to expect will help me a great deal, especially if I see
very little happening day to day.
\n\n=== PAGE 189 ===\n Considerations 
before Going Live
 PA R T  V 
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 189 ===\nrans

CONSIDERATIONS
BEFORE GOING LIVE
\n\n=== PAGE 190 ===\n\n\n=== PAGE 191 ===\n177
 Account and 
Position Sizing 
N
ow that I’ve developed a strategy, watched it in real time for a while, and de-
cided to trade it with my own money, then what? How do I determine how 
much to fund the account with? How do I position size? Do I start small or big? Do 
I have a position‐sizing scheme? If things go bad, when do I quit trading the system?
 At the end of the incubation period in mid‐August 2013, I truly have no idea how 
this system will do over the next few months. My hope, as always, is that it will do 
great, but as with any strategy, I am always prepared to cut my losses and stop trad-
ing it if need be. 
 To avoid confusion later on, here is a summary of my strategies: 
 Two Trading Strategies in Euro Trading System:
Strategy 1: Euro Night.  Trades overnight session, has high winning percentage, lots 
of little wins, and an occasional big loser. Uses 105‐minute bars.
Strategy 2: Euro Day.  Trades day session, lower win percentage, primary profi t 
generator. Uses 60‐minute bars. 
 Both strategies are independent, and I’ll be in only one at any given time. 
 Market: Euro Currency Futures (6E). 
■ When to Quit
 Now that I have decided to start trading my euro strategies live starting on Monday, 
August 20, 2013, I have to address the question that everyone likes to avoid when 
starting to trade a new strategy: if things go bad, when do I quit trading the strategy? 
 C H A P T E R   2 0  
\n\n=== PAGE 192 ===\n178
ACCOUNT AND POSITION SIZING
 There are probably a million diff erent conditions you could use as a basis for quit-
ting a trading system. You could set a dollar amount or possibly wait until you get a 
margin call, or wait until you run out of money. You could stop after X losers in a
row, or X losing months. There is no “one” right or wrong answer.
 But there are three keys to setting a quitting point: 
 1.  It should be based on the system you are trading. It makes no sense, for example, 
to quit after a 10 percent drawdown, if historically the system had 25 percent 
drawdowns before. This seems obvious, but you’d be amazed at how many peo-
ple make arbitrary decisions like this, without taking the characteristics of the 
actual system into account. 
 2.  Write it down. Refer to it often. Remember it. This may save you from disaster 
one day. 
 3.  Follow it. If/when the written criteria are (unfortunately) met,  stop trading. This
is a simple, but very diffi  cult, step to follow.
y
 I don’t always use the same criteria for fi nding my quitting point, but here is how 
I am doing it for the euro system: 
 A.  Look at walk‐forward history, and fi nd the worst drawdown that occurred (daily 
basis). Multiply it by 1.5, since the worst drawdown is almost always in the 
future. For my system, that worst drawdown comes out to be $3,265. Multiply
this by 1.5 to get $4,898. 
 B.  Use Monte Carlo simulation to fi nd the 95 percent level max drawdown. That 
means, in a year’s worth of trading, 95 percent of the time my maximum draw-
down will be less than this amount. This turns out to be $5,082. (If I wanted 
to be more conservative, I could use the 99 percent level. That drawdown is 
$6,512.) 
 I should point out those drawdown fi gures assume one contract being traded the 
whole time. Yet, I will hopefully be trading more than one contract as time goes on.
This could get confusing—my actual drawdown (with multiple contracts) could be a
lot bigger than my drawdown limit (based on one contract). I just have to remember
to calculate the one‐contract drawdown, and compare than to the $5,000 limit. This 
will be clearer later, when I set up my monitoring system.
 Using results from points A and B above, I will take the average, and stop 
trading when the single contract drawdown reaches $5,000 (slightly rounded).
I have followed points 1 and 2 above. Time will tell if I follow point 3—
I better if I need to! 
 For this particular system, the only quit point I am considering is the single‐
contract drawdown. This is simple, and pretty robust. If I am trading the system
years from now, with many contracts (my hope, of course), I will still have that 
$5,000 maximum drawdown per contract limit. 
\n\n=== PAGE 193 ===\n179
ACCOUNT AND POSITION SIZING
 In the past, I have used the Monte Carlo simulation results to help me decide 
when to quit. I have also examined, but never implemented, a temporary quit point
based on market volatility. When the market gets super‐crazy, it may be best to take
a break. I don’t think there is a wrong metric or combination of metrics to use to 
decide when to quit trading. There is probably no “one size fi ts all” optimum, either. 
The key, in my mind, is to select some criteria that you are comfortable with, write it 
down, and then follow it exactly. Then, if your system fails, there should be no tears. 
You knew the system could break, and you quit at a preordained spot. 
 I think where people get in trouble is in not having a “quit point,” or their quit 
point is when their money runs out. Speaking from personal experience in the 
late 1990’s, having to quit trading when your money is gone is not a pleasant 
way to quit.
 What happens when the system performance isn’t bad enough to hit your 
quitting point, and it is not great either, but is somewhere in between? Maybe 
it is making money, or breaking even, and it is within the bounds of what Monte 
Carlo simulation says is possible. When do you quit, or otherwise cease trading 
the system? My general philosophy is to watch the downside and let the upside 
take care of itself. In this case, I watch the max drawdown and, as long as that is 
not hit, let the system perform. I do this because I never know month to month 
or year to year what particular systems I am trading will do good, which will do 
bad, and which will just tread water. Normally, I’ll just let system be and not turn 
them off  or on. 
 But a couple of times a year I rebalance systems I am trading—add in new ones 
and cull the underperformers and possibly adjust the position sizing. If capital be-
comes an issue, I might very well stop trading and swap out a mildly profi table but
underperforming system for a system that I feel has more potential. The analysis 
details are never the same, and I don’t have strict rules on this. I might, for example, 
stop trading a system because I no longer like it for some reason—maybe it just
doesn’t fi t me anymore.
 I realize that I am sort of talking out both sides of my mouth here. On one side I 
say, “Maximum drawdown is my only quitting criteria.” On the other side I say, “Un-
less I come up with another legitimate reason to cease trading it.” I rationalize this 
by saying the maximum drawdown is a hard, solid, worst‐case criterion and will not 
be violated. At the same time, though, other circumstances may arise that cause the 
system to fall out of favor. These circumstances might cause me to quit earlier. That
is a big gray area, as unfortunately most things are with trading. 
 I can say my plan at the start of trading includes only maximum drawdown as the 
sole criterion for quitting. With the small size and account size I am using to trade 
this system, I can’t foresee needing the capital for a better system. But I am also fl ex-
ible enough to realize that circumstances may cause me to alter my quitting point at 
some time. 
\n\n=== PAGE 194 ===\n180
ACCOUNT AND POSITION SIZING
 
■ Minimum Funding Size
 At this point, I have fi gured out (1) that I will begin live trading the euro day and 
night system, and (2) I will quit trading if my single‐contract drawdown hits $5,000.
Now I will determine account size. This point is pretty important. Too little capital 
to start, and I may run out of money before the quitting point. Too much capital
and I will have a lower rate of return, as well as an ineffi  cient allocation of capital. 
Currently, the exchange initial margin on euro currency is $2,750. So, add this to
my “quitting point” drawdown, and I get $7,750. This is the minimum account size I 
should start with. This will allow me to trade up until my max drawdown is reached. 
 A few important points to consider: 
 
■ I am assuming my broker requires exchange margin, even for day trading. If I had 
access to day‐trading rates, I could get by with less. This is always a risky propo-
sition, though, since many people just increase their size because of the lower 
day‐trade margin rates. This is usually not a good idea. 
 
■ Margins can and do change. If the exchange required margin goes up, I may be 
forced to stop trading before hitting my quitting point. 
 
■ I am assuming that I am trading a single contract all the time. 
 As it turns out, I will want more than $7,750 in my account, for position‐sizing 
reasons. I am going to use $8,500, for reasons that will be revealed later.
 
■ Position Sizing
 If you have a good trading system, eventually you will want to start trading it with 
multiple contracts. There are tons of position‐sizing schemes out there (Van Tharp 
wrote a huge book on the topic), so there is no right way to do it. There is no Holy 
Grail position‐sizing technique, though, where you get more reward for no extra 
risk. The simple way to put it is this way: if you trade more contracts, your reward 
goes up, but so does your risk. 
 Here is what I am doing (at least for a while; hopefully, once my size gets big, I’ll 
become less aggressive): 
 As always, I start out with only one contract. Why? Going live almost always 
reveals issues that back tests, sim tests, and incubation tests keep hidden. For ex-
ample, if my strategy is automated, what if some quirk in my code sends multiple 
orders or otherwise goofs up? Or what if my slippage estimates are way off , and 
real‐world slippage actually makes my strategy unprofi table? My experience is that 
starting with one contract is the cheapest way to fi nd out and correct any live trad-
ing issues. 
\n\n=== PAGE 195 ===\n181
ACCOUNT AND POSITION SIZING
 A second reason I like starting with one contract is that I want to remain emo-
tionally detached as much as possible from the strategy performance. One‐contract 
profi t‐and‐loss swings won’t impact me or my emotions. Ten contracts, right off  the 
bat, would freak me out a bit—I’d be watching the system too much and have too 
emotion invested in it. As profi ts (hopefully) accumulate, I can add contracts at a 
comfortable level, and not be emotionally disturbed by it. If things go really well, 
in six months or even a year or two, trading 10 contracts at a time with this proven
system will seem natural to me. 
 Some people would say, “If you have an edge, exploit it fast and furiously by 
trading maximum size right off  the bat. Edges disappear, so take advantage while 
it exists.”  That is a good argument, and I understand the concept. But I also know 
how I best operate, and going “all in” at the start is not good psychologically 
for me. Of course, you should choose the approach that you feel most 
comfortable with.
 A fi nal reason I like starting with one contract is that I like the strategy to be 
self‐generating—profi ts will build the account, leading to more contracts, building 
it further, leading to even more contracts, and so on. No profi ts mean no increase 
in size. That just makes sense to me; why allocate more money to a system that isn’t 
generating profi ts?
 One drawback to this approach is that it can take a long time to add that second 
contract. For example, if you decide to trade one contract for each $10,000 in your 
account, you will have to have 100 percent return to add one contract. Then you’ll 
need another 50 percent gain to add a third contract. That can take a long time. Some
position‐sizing techniques take this into account (fi xed ratio sizing comes to mind), 
but these approaches have some negative characteristics I do not like.
I get around this dilemma by sizing my account for roughly 1.5 to 2 contracts at 
the start. This would be equivalent to starting with $15,000 in the example I gave 
just above. Then, I need only a 50 percent gain to add a second contract. This still 
forces the system to perform well, but at the same time I get contract growth sooner. 
For me, it is a great trade‐off .
 With all that in mind, here are the details:
 For my euro system, I have decided to use fi xed fractional sizing.
Ncontracts
N
 =  X * Equity/BigLoss
X
 where
Ncontracts
N
 = Integer number of contracts, always round numbers down. 
X =  Fixed fraction, which I determined through Monte Carlo analysis.
X
For this system, I am using 0.175 (I’ll explain later how I got
this value). 
\n\n=== PAGE 196 ===\n182
ACCOUNT AND POSITION SIZING
 Equity = Current equity value.
 BigLoss = Largest daily loss, $885 for my euro system.
 Using the preceding, I can create Table  20.1 . 
 Note that my fi xed fraction of 0.175 might seem awfully high. It may be for most 
people. I determine it based on risk of ruin, annual return, and max drawdown. I
use my Monte Carlo spreadsheet to calculate all that. Based on the position‐sizing 
analysis so far, I determined that using fi xed fractional sizing with X = ff  = 0.175 was
X
my best alternative. Please realize that this is my personal preference, based on my 
personal goals and objectives, and that amount probably would not be right for you. 
 The question is, how did I arrive at this fi gure? Why not just trade one contract all 
the time, or use a fi xed fractional value of .01 or .02 or 0.10 or 0.50?  To determine the 
position‐sizing scheme that is right for me, I use my Monte Carlo simulator, the basic
(one‐contract) version of which you can download for free at the web site (www
.wiley.com/go/algotradingsystems). For a given trading system, it will estimate the 
probabilities of risk of ruin, median max drawdown, and median annual return for 
the fi rst year of trading. 
 The baseline version of this calculator assumes one contract traded throughout 
the year, but the macro code can be edited to simulate diff erent position‐sizing tech-
niques, which is what I am doing here. 
 There are four performance numbers I look at: 
 1.  Risk of ruin. How likely am I to hit my defi ned lower cash balance. I want this
number low. 
 TABLE 20.1  Position‐Sizing Table 
ff =
0.175
Equity
Ncontracts
N
< $10,114
1
$10,114
2
$15,171
3
$20,229
4
$25,286
5
$30,343
6
$35,400
7
$40,457
8
$45,514
9
$50,571
10
\n\n=== PAGE 197 ===\n183
ACCOUNT AND POSITION SIZING
 2.  Median maximum drawdown. I have roughly a 50 percent chance of hitting this 
maximum drawdown sometime during the year. That of course means my maxi-
mum drawdown could be much greater than this value, and it could be less. I 
want it as low as possible, with a personal upper limit I have determined from 
doing this exercise a bunch of times. 
3. Annual return.
 
 As with drawdown, I have a 50 percent chance of reaching this an-
nual return, and it could be much higher or much lower. I want it as high as pos-
sible, but I have no lower‐limit threshold acceptable value (although 40 percent
is a good value). 
 4.  Return/Drawdown ratio. Astute readers will recognize this as the Calmar ratio,
although true Calmar is calculated over three years, not just one year. I want 
this value as high as possible, and I have a lower limit for acceptability. (Just for
reference, for professional Commodity Trading Advisors a Calmar above 1 is 
considered pretty good. That means if you want 25 percent annual return, you
have to be willing to accept a 25 percent drawdown).
 Using these criteria, I can try a few diff erent position‐sizing approaches, with 
some diff erent parameter values. Note that this is not all‐encompassing; I have not
analyzed many other potential position‐sizing schemes. Maybe one would work bet-
ter than what I chose. 
 Before I reveal the results, I should mention that I played around with the starting 
balance a bit, although I am not showing those interim results. Basically, by adjust-
ing the initial account size, I was striking a balance between having too much money 
in the account, being able to add on a second contract relatively quickly (without
doubling my account size fi rst), and keeping risk of ruin low. I eventually settled on 
$8,500 as the start balance, a good trade‐off  among all competing metrics. 
 Here are the results, with the one I chose highlighted (“ff ” is the fi xed fractional 
amount) (see Figure  20.1 ).
 My selection meets all my criteria, and I am comfortable with it. This position 
scheme is the right one for me, right now. But, depending on how things go, I might
change it down the road, either to a diff erent scheme altogether, or a smaller value of 
ff  (i.e., I will become less aggressive as the account grows). I’ll let the performance 
of the system dictate if and when that happens. 
 With the fi xed fractional sizing I have chosen, results say that in an “average” year 
(meaning, 50 percent of years will be worse, and 50 percent of years will be bet-
ter), I expect to make $30,735 profi t in that year and hit a maximum drawdown of 
38.1 percent sometime during the year. That profi t number seems a little too good
to be true … and my motto is “if something seems too good to be true, it probably 
is.” And that profi t number does seem too good to be true—362 percent rate of 
return in that fi rst year seems too high, and that makes me suspicious. Remember, 
\n\n=== PAGE 198 ===\n184
ACCOUNT AND POSITION SIZING
though, the actual rate of return could be just about anywhere on the spectrum. 
It is just that the 362 percent is the median value. 
I now look at a histogram of possible returns, shown in Figure  20.2 . It will be in-
teresting to see if the year 1 results are anywhere close to the median ending equity 
(black vertical line). If they are, I will be very happy. I’ll still be happy if I even hit the 
25 percent mark, which is a fi nal equity of about $21,000, or a 147 percent return 
for the year. Almost in “too good to be true” region, but it is a possibility. 
 FIGURE 20.1
Position‐Sizing Results 
Start Equity
$8,500
$11,960
1%
1%
1%
1%
4%
0%
19.6%
22.0%
32.3%
43.6%
53.9%
714%
460%
249%
155%
141%
13.38
10.44
7.86
6.81
ff = 0.1
ff = 0.15
ff = 0.2
ff = 0.25
7.12
1 contract always
Ruin
Median
Drawdown
Median $
Prof
Median
Return
Return/DD
Sizing Method
$31,598
$13,189
$21,155
$39,074
$60,688
37.8%
372%
9.64
add at 10K, and every 5K up
$8,500
$8,500
$8,500
$8,500
$8,500
1%
38.1%
362%
9.55
ff = 0.175
$30,735
$8,500
 FIGURE 20.2
Histogram of Possible First Year Returns 
Frequency
2000
8000
14000
20000
26000
32000
38000
44000
50000
56000
62000
68000
74000
80000
86000
92000
98000
104000
110000
116000
122000
128000
134000
140000
146000
Median equity
Equity after One Year
−10
10.%
20.%
30.%
40.%
50.%
60.%
70.%
80.%
90.%
100.%
.%
10
30
50
70
90
110
130
150
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 198 ===\ne
Bd

ACCOUNT AND POSITION SIZING | =

FIGURE 20.1 Position-Sizing Results

though, the actual rate of return could be just about anywhere on the spectrum.
It is just that the 362 percent is the median value.

Tnow look at a histogram of possible returns, shown in Figure 20.2. It will be in-
teresting to see if the year 1 results are anywhere close to the median ending equity
(black vertical line). If they are, I will be very happy. I'll still be happy if I even hit the
25 percent mark, which is a final equity of about $21,000, or a 147 percent return
for the year. Almost in “too good to be true” region, but it is a possibility.

Median equity

Frequency

Equity after One Year

FIGURE 20.2 Histogram of Possible First Year Returns
\n\n=== PAGE 199 ===\n185
ACCOUNT AND POSITION SIZING
 
■Unequal Position Sizing 
 I am using the same position sizing for the two strategies in my euro day and night 
system, even though strategies 1 and 2 are for the most part diff erent. The only thing 
they have in common is the stop‐loss point, around $425 (34 ticks) per contract.
Given their diff erent trade distributions, is the equal position size approach correct? 
Maybe the position sizing should be diff erent for the two strategies. Possibly, that 
would improve overall performance metrics.
 As with any trading idea or thought that pops up, I reserve judgment on it until I 
test and analyze it. The numbers will tell me if this is a good thing to do or not. No 
emotion is the point, I suppose. I’ll spare you some of the minutiae of my analysis,
but I primarily looked at “trade two contracts of strategy 1 for every one contract of 
strategy 2.” 
 Results
 Current method (identical sizing, both strategies) 
 Acct size: $8,500
 Max DD: 38.1 percent
 Annual return: 362 percent 
 2/1 Sizing method
 Acct size: $12,500
 Max DD: 38.3 percent (same as current method) 
 Annual return: 255 percent 
Conclusion: I would need more money in the account to trade a 2‐to‐1 ratio,
and my annual return would go down. So it does not make sense. 
Note: I performed a pretty simple analysis to conclude this. Really, what I should 
do is let the fi xed fractional sizing for each strategy fl oat, and fi nd the optimum for 
each.
\n\n=== PAGE 200 ===\n\n\n=== PAGE 201 ===\n187
 F
requently, I hear from discretionary traders, and the conversation goes some-
thing like this: 
Discretionary Trader: “I am sick of losing. I am too emotional to trade and 
make trading decisions at the same time. I want to try algorithmic trading.” 
Me: “That is good you realized a need to change your losing ways. Why do you 
think algorithmic trading will work?” 
Discretionary Trader: “Because I can be a brain‐dead button pusher and just 
follow the system. Kind of like that episode of The Simpsons, where Homer 
sets up a drinking bird to continuously tap the “y” key on his keyboard, so he 
would not have to do any actual work. I want to be the drinking bird, just 
following the system.” 
Me: “You do realize that the drinking bird eventually stopped and almost caused 
a nuclear meltdown, right?” 
Discretionary Trader: “Huh?” 
 That pretty much sums it up—many people think there is no emotion involved in 
mechanical trading. Emotions manifest diff erently in algorithmic trading, as opposed 
to discretionary trading, but they are there, in many diff erent aspects of trading. The 
nice thing about algorithmic trading is that your emotions theoretically should not 
matter for entry and exit signals. The key word, of course, is theoretically. In reality, 
emotions can creep in many diff erent areas of mechanical, 100 percent rules‐based 
trading. In this chapter, I’ll point out some of these major areas and provide tips for 
how to minimize their impact because, just as with discretionary trading, emotions 
can really kill the performance of an algorithmic trader. 
 Trading Psychology
 C H A P T E R   2 1  
\n\n=== PAGE 202 ===\n188
TRADING PSYCHOLOGY
 
■ When to Begin Trading 
 Most people, when deciding to go live with an algorithmic strategy, never think 
about when to actually enter that fi rst position until they do it. But, as I’ve said be-
fore, entering a position in the middle of an open trade can be emotional. Also, what
if your system had six consecutive winners—do you wait for a losing trade or two
before you start trading? There are really two questions to address: 
 1.  Should you start trading your system after looking at its equity curve? 
 2.  Should you start trading your system in the middle of a trade, or wait for the 
next new entry signal?
 As with most decisions in trading, there is no absolute right or wrong answer. 
But if you look at the problem beforehand and make consistent decisions, you can
eliminate much of the emotion when starting out.
 Let’s say you’ve created a trading system with the equity curve shown in 
Figure  21.1 (it is from an actual system I have traded with real money). This is a
pretty good equity curve for a walk‐forward test, and it passed the incubation test 
you just ran for a few months. The system is at an equity peak, and you are very ex-
cited (there is the emotional part!) to begin trading. 
 At fi rst glance, you see the new high and immediately think, “It is a runaway train, 
I have to get on now!”   That is certainly understandable. At some point, though, that 
 FIGURE 21.1
 Sample Walk‐Forward Equity Curve 
Walk-forward results
Incubation results
Equity($)
−10000
0
 10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
70000
80000
90000
100000
110000
120000
200
100
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
1100
1200
1300
Trade Number
Equity Curve Line -@ES 1 min.(12/10/97 08:18 - 12/30/11 16:15)
Trades
Peaks
Create with tradeStation. ©TradeStation Technologies, Inc. All rights reserved.
1400
1500
1600
1700
1800
1900
2000
2100
2200
Legend
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 202 ===\nw%
%

SYCHOLOGY | =

TRADING

= When to Begin Trading

Most people, when deciding to go live with an algorithmic strategy, never think
about when to actually enter that first position until they do it. But, as I’ve said be-
fore, entering a position in the middle of an open trade can be emotional. Also, what
if your system had six consecutive winners—do you wait for a losing trade or two
before you start trading? There are really two questions to address:

1, Should you start trading your system after looking at its equity curve?
2. Should you start trading your system in the middle of a trade, or wait for the
next new entry signal?

As with most decisions in trading, there is no absolute right or wrong answer.
But if you look at the problem beforehand and make consistent decisions, you can
eliminate much of the emotion when starting out.

Let’s say you've created a trading system with the equity curve shown in
Figure 21.1 (it is from an actual system I have traded with real money). This is a
pretty good equity curve for a walk-forward test, and it passed the incubation test
you just ran for a few months. The system is at an equity peak, and you are very ex-
cited (there is the emotional part!) to begin trading,

At first glance, you see the new high and immediately think, “It is a runaway train,
Thave to get on now!” That is certainly understandable. At some point, though, that

Equity Curve Line -@ES 1 min.(12/10/97 08:18 - 12/30/11 16:15)

420000)
110000) Pr ot
100000} sis
90000
80000
70000

mapped Legend

— Trades
Peaks

60000
50000} Walk-forward results

40000

Equiy(s)

30000

20000 Incubation results ~~

40000
0

-10000°
FFF FFF FFF EE FSF SFEFEFEEF ESF og

Trade Number

Create with radeStation. TradeStation Technologies, Inc.All rights reserved

FIGURE 21.1 Sample Walk-Forward Equity Curve
\n\n=== PAGE 203 ===\n189
TRADING PSYCHOLOGY
train will slow down or even reverse direction. It is a terrible feeling to start trad-
ing a new system at an equity high, only to endure a drawdown right off  the bat. So
maybe it is better to wait for a small pullback in the equity curve and then begin 
trading. Of course, you run the risk of there never being a signifi cant pullback, and 
then think of all the profi ts you’ll miss out on! 
 Both approaches, starting at or near a new high, or starting after a pullback, have 
their emotional advantages and disadvantages. On any given system, no one really 
knows the best approach to take. Over many systems, it probably does not mat-
ter all that much—some strategies will continue being profi table right after you 
start, and other strategies will immediately go into drawdown. For me personally, 
it seems that most systems go immediately into drawdown, but I think that I for-
get about the ones whose equity curve takes off  and just remember the immediate 
drawdown systems. 
 Given the emotional charge inherent in either approach, the simplest thing to 
do is to make a decision for all future systems you start trading and then stick to 
it. For example, you could decide to begin trading after four months of successful 
incubation, regardless of whether the equity curve is at an equity high, recover-
ing from a drawdown, or somewhere in between. That way, sometimes you’ll be 
right, and sometimes you’ll be wrong, but it should be an emotionless task to 
begin trading. 
 Once you have decided on an approach to start trading, you’ll realize that there is 
an existing position that needs to be accounted for. Should you wait for the next new 
signal? Or should you enter the current winning or losing position? Again, emotion 
can enter into this decision. As with the equity curve decision, it is best to decide up 
front and keep emotion out of it. 
 Part of the decision to enter an existing trade depends on your software and 
your trading style. Some automated platforms may have trouble recognizing a 
manually entered position. This could lead to your exit signal’s not being triggered. 
If this is the case with your software, it is best to just wait for the next fresh 
entry signal. 
 Your trading style also plays a role in entering an existing position. In a fast‐paced 
day‐trading system, with multiple trades per day, the answer is easy: just wait for the 
next entry signal. Since they happen often, there will be little to be gained or lost. A 
diff erent story exists, though, for strategies that have positions on for days, weeks,
or months at a time. What is the best approach here? If the position is close to break-
even, just enter it manually. It may cost you or make you a few extra dollars, but in 
the long run it does not matter. 
 The decision gets a little trickier with open positions that are currently big 
winners or big losers. What approach is best here? Some people will want to enter 
an open winning trade, on the theory that winning trades will keep on winning. 
That makes sense, except that you may be incurring much more risk to enter a 
\n\n=== PAGE 204 ===\n190
TRADING PSYCHOLOGY
winner. Let’s look at an example. Let’s say your trade is set up to yield either a 
$500 profi t or a $250 loss, and you never change the profi t target or stop‐loss. It 
is now midway through the trade, and you have a $300 open profi t. Should you 
enter? Well, initially you had a 2:1 reward‐to‐risk ratio, and by entering mid‐
trade, you have a 200:550 or 0.36:1 reward‐to‐risk ratio. Although the likelihood 
of your getting a $200 gain before a $550 loss is much better than the original 
likelihood of $500 gain or $250 loss, I’d focus more on the downside. Instead of 
losing $250 on the trade, you could lose $550. Ask yourself whether you want to 
risk that extra loss. 
 The same logic applies to open losing trades. In this case, however, your loss 
would be less by entering midtrade, and your potential gain could be a lot larger. 
This is the approach I use when starting to trade a new system: if the current open
trade is a loser, I enter it. If it is a winning trade, I wait for the next signal, or until the 
position pull backs in profi t to near breakeven. This is the approach that makes me
comfortable. I am not emotional about it, I don’t worry if I made the right decision, 
I just consistently execute the plan. To me, that is the important point. 
 As you can see, going “live” with an algorithmic system leaves you with a few 
conundrums and questions. Over the years, I have probably fi ddled with all combina-
tions of the choices of when to start trading a strategy. I’ve been through the sheer 
disappointment of waiting for a pullback in the equity curve, only to see the system
go up for months on end. I’ve also entered open positions and suff ered losses right 
off  the bat, when waiting for the next entry signal would have been better. Similarly, 
sometimes the opposite occurred, and I “won” at these decisions. Overall, I don’t
think it has improved my situation at all but has defi nitely led to lost emotional
capital. So now I have a plan, known in advance, and I start every system the same 
way. This eliminates all emotion from the equation.
 
■ When to Quit
 Once you’ve settled on an approach to start trading a system, you’ve completed half 
the battle. But, do you know when you’ll stop following that new system? Emotions 
can play a huge role here. Whether you are following your own trading system or
following an adviser, newsletter, or some other service, if you don’t have an exit plan
for discontinuing it, you really need to.
 Why? Studies have shown that when people are under stress, many times they 
make poor decisions. Certainly, if you were losing money with your systems, you
would be stressed. Consequently, you might make a knee‐jerk reaction to the losses, 
or you may stick your head in the sand and avoid a decision all together. Both sce-
narios can be dangerous. So the time when you are losing is a bad time to determine
when to stop trading a strategy. 
\n\n=== PAGE 205 ===\n191
TRADING PSYCHOLOGY
 Ideally, you determined when to stop trading when you fi rst decided to trade the 
system. If not, it is not too late. Just determine the metric(s) that are most important 
to you. They could include such things as: 
 
■ Maximum drawdown. 
 
■ Consecutive losers in a row.
 
■ Amount lost in a week/month/year.
 
■ Overall profi t after X months.
 
■ Overall winning percentage dips below XX percent.
 
■ Signifi cant break in your personal equity trend line or equity moving average. 
 
■ New highs, or breaking of another “good” metric (yes, some people try to quit at 
the top). 
 
■ Anything that can be measured and monitored.
 
■ Statistical Process Control techniques—for advanced users only.
 The exact condition you select probably is not as important as writing it down and 
sticking to it. That is the key. It needs to be solid, defi nitive, and written down. Ide-
ally, you’ll also tell your spouse or a friend, too, since it is harder to back out when
you make the proclamation public.
 I’ve heard that one money management fi rm’s exit criterion is 1.5 times the maxi-
mum drawdown, and a 24‐month commitment. Those aren’t bad, but the best one is 
the one that you feel comfortable with—one you can stick with. 
 You’ll defi nitely worry less about your system’s performance if you write down 
and follow your exit plan. 
 Once you have decided on an approach to start with real money trading of a strat-
egy, and formulated an approach to cease trading should things go bad, all you have
to do is turn on the system and let it run, right? You can sleep well, go to your day
job, and just let the system run, without any emotional expenditure on your part,
correct? Certainly, that is how the gurus selling automated “robots” or “advisers” 
make it sound. That’s how they lure many people in: the siren song of emotionless
trading. Unfortunately, much like the sailors in ancient Greece who lost their lives 
sailing to the sound, many a trader has been undone by the emotions involved in 
so‐called emotionless algorithmic trading.
 Emotions bubble to the surface in mechanical trading in many diff erent ways. The 
most common time for emotions to come into play is in the decision to take every 
trade or not. Clearly, if you’ve tested a strategy and concluded it is worthwhile, then
you need to follow it exactly as tested. That sounds easy until a drawdown is in-
curred, or a number of consecutive losing trades occurs. That is when doubt and fear
\n\n=== PAGE 206 ===\n192
TRADING PSYCHOLOGY
creep in. “The last fi ve trades have been losers, and that only happened two times in 
the walk‐forward back‐test historical testing,” says the little voice in your head. “Skip 
this trade, and wait for a winner fi rst.” Unfortunately, this is how the mind works, at 
least for me. It takes nerves of steel sometimes to overrule the voice in your head.
But for any chance of long‐term success, you need to keep taking signals without
question. Otherwise, by picking and choosing which trades to take, and which to 
reject, you have completely invalidated all the testing and analysis behind the system. 
In other words, you are just gambling, and that almost never ends well. 
 Once you get a good feel for your strategy, you’ll begin to know ahead of time 
when a signal is likely to be triggered. For example, at the close of each bar if you 
are expecting a buy on an upward moving average cross, if the current bar is trend-
ing higher, you’ll know the cross will occur at the close of the current bar. Greed 
can take hold here—why not enter now, before the bar closes? Extra profi t might 
be yours, with no real additional risk. But just like “cherry picking” certain trades, 
this “jumping the gun” scenario is a really bad idea. There will be times where it 
doesn’t work out, and times it will. You can waste a lot of emotional capital stress-
ing over whether to enter (or exit) early or not. Just remember, though, that when 
you don’t take the entries and exits exactly as your system says, you should not 
rely on historical results at all. What you’ve created is a new strategy, with no real 
historical basis.
 In both of the preceding scenarios, emotions can come in when you make deci-
sions contrary to the strategy rules. So in both of these cases, the emotions can be 
eliminated by strict discipline—following the rules of the system without question, 
without fail. This discipline takes time to develop, especially if you are trading only 
one strategy. Your tendency will be to watch that strategy carefully, think about it 
often, and inevitably ponder overruling the strategy. My advice in this case is to
trade multiple strategies if you can. Once you are trading three or more strategies, it 
becomes hard  not to follow the rules. This is akin to the serial liar, who tells so many 
lies to so many people that eventually the truth comes out. You’ll get so confused 
by what you are actually doing and what you should be doing that just following the 
rules will be much, much easier. 
 In automated trading, I occasionally have to deal with emotions at a stressful 
time—when something goes wrong. It could be an Internet connection lost, a man-
ual order placed incorrectly, a broker issue, forgetting to roll over, or one of a thou-
sand diff erent “gotchas” that can spring up. Once you notice the issue, or the position 
mismatch, your stress level goes through the roof. At least mine does. What should
I do—exit everything, wait for a better price and reenter, do nothing, run around 
the room babbling like an idiot? These are all possible reactions to an unforeseen
problem; heaven knows I’ve done my share of incoherent screaming and shouting at 
times. Emotions can take hold, and terrible decisions can be made in the heat of the
moment. 
\n\n=== PAGE 207 ===\n193
TRADING PSYCHOLOGY
 The solution to eliminating emotions at stressful times like this is surprisingly 
simple, yet many times tough to implement. Simply sync your real‐world position 
and your strategy’s position as quickly as possible. Don’t try to get a better price, fi -
nesse the order, or any nonsense like that. Just get back in with market orders. Don’t 
think about this decision, don’t react to any external stimuli—just execute and get 
positions to match. Sounds simple, yes, but in reality it can be impossible to do. Just 
keep it unemotional, and in the long run you’ll be much better off .
 I’ve mentioned it before, but it bears repeating: the key to successful algorithmic 
trading is discipline. You need to be disciplined enough to follow signals without fail. 
You have to avoid the temptation to enter early or jump the gun and exit early. Plus, 
when things go wrong, you absolutely need to get your system back in line with its
rules as soon as possible. Your ability to do this will be determined by the amount 
of discipline you have. Just remember, though, when your emotions take over and
you do not follow the rules, you are basically just gambling. Gamblers in the market 
usually lose. 
\n\n=== PAGE 208 ===\n\n\n=== PAGE 209 ===\n195
 I
n addition to starting with the right account size, knowing when to quit, and set-
ting up a position‐sizing scheme, there are other considerations that you must 
think about before going live. The list of potential items is long, so here I just high-
light some of the issues I have found most important when going live.
 
■ Accounting, Trading Brokers
 I trade multiple systems live right now, and I use various accounts at various 
brokers. I do this for a few reasons. First, doing all the bookkeeping and accounting 
gets confusing when multiple systems are all lumped into the same account. 
More than once, “orphan” positions that I forgot to close pop up. Having one 
trading system per trading account makes things a lot easier from a management 
standpoint. 
 The second reason I use multiple brokers is that sometimes brokers go belly 
up or walk away with your money. I lost some money when PFG Best went out 
of business in 2012, when its founder revealed he had been forging bank state-
ments for years. I still have only gotten back about a third of my money, and I 
doubt I’ll ever see it all. I’m no longer mad about it, but when I go back and 
look at the interview I did on Fox Business Channel right when the scandal broke 
 Other
Considerations
before Going Live
 C H A P T E R   2 2  
\n\n=== PAGE 210 ===\n196
OTHER CONSIDERATIONS BEFORE GOING LIVE
(http://video.foxbusiness.com/v/1729212213001/pfgbest-victim-unable-to-
trade-with-account-frozen), it is clear to me I was in a pissed‐off  state of mind. I 
do not need that aggravation again. To me, spreading my risk around will keep me 
trading even if one broker fails.
 The drawbacks to my approach are obvious. If I am worried about brokers fail-
ing, having more accounts with more brokers just increases the chances of my run-
ning into a bad broker, right? My approach may not be better than fi nding the best
broker and just putting all my eggs in that basket. The second drawback is that using 
multiple brokers leads to a less‐than‐optimal use of capital (margin) situation. This 
leads to less return, since more of my money is not put to use. That, to me, is an ac-
ceptable trade‐off . 
 So, for my euro day and night system, I will open a new trading account.
 After looking at my automation requirements, and the fact that all my code is 
written in TradeStation Easy Language, it makes the most sense to either use Trade-
Station as the broker or a NinjaTrader broker. For the Ninja option, there is a neat
little feature in NinjaTrader that will take TradeStation‐generated signals, run them 
thru NinjaTrader, and then send the signals on to a Ninja Broker. I’ve used it before
with success, so it is a good option. The TradeStation option is the cleanest and easi-
est, of course. 
 
■ Automation, Unattended, VPS, Where Are Orders Kept?
 Here are some other topics I had to consider when taking my euro day and night 
strategy live: 
 Backup Plans 
 In an ideal world, computers never crash, Internet connections never go down, your 
broker always is up, and so on. In the real world, lots of things can go wrong. Some 
things to consider—do you need any of these?
 
■ Backup PC
 
■ Backup data storage (off site and onsite) 
 
■ Backup Internet provider 
 
■ Backup power supply
 
■ Backup phone line
 
■ Backup broker 
 
■ Backup trading desk 
\n\n=== PAGE 211 ===\n197
OTHER CONSIDERATIONS BEFORE GOING LIVE
 There is more, I know, but having backups (and possibly even backups for the 
backups) for everything on this list will get you a long way.
 To Automate or Not to Automate? 
 During incubation, I manually traded my strategies in simulation mode for a while. 
I had to have TradeStation alert me, after which I would manually place orders in 
another platform. Over time, I missed a few trades, made a few mistakes, forgot 
to cancel open orders, and so on. Overall, I don’t think these mistakes cost me any 
simulation “money.” In fact, they may have saved me a few bucks. But that isn’t the 
point. The point is that I want to trade the system as I developed it. So, automation 
makes the most sense for me. Therefore, I will trade it automated. 
 Attended, Unattended?
 TradeStation always warns its clients that “automated trading does not mean unat-
tended trading.”  This is pretty sound advice, since issues pop up from time to time,
Internet connections go down, orders get missed, and so on. I plan on usually being 
around the PC when this strategy is running, so I’d say it qualifi es as “semiattended.” 
If my account grows and my contract size gets signifi cant, I’ll revisit this approach. 
 VPS 
 Many people use virtual private servers (VPSs) for their trading, to keep the down-
time and data lag to a minimum, and their reliability high. I personally do not use 
any VPS services currently, but I am always monitoring my situation for reasons to 
use it. In the past year, I’ve lost Internet connection only twice, and once was on a 
weekend. If my systems traded more than a few times a day, or if I were running a 
high‐speed scalping strategy, I’d defi nitely use a VPS.
 Where Orders Are Kept 
 I bring this up because many people don’t know where their orders are. When 
your automated strategy fi res an order, is it kept on your machine? On the broker’s 
servers? At the exchange? Plus, diff erent types of orders (limit, stop) may have dif-
ferent routing. For example, limit orders might be sent directly to the exchange, but 
stop orders may be held at the broker.
 My point in bringing this up is that you should know where your orders are and 
have plans in place in case something goes wrong. You might think you have an order 
at the exchange, but after your Internet goes down and a fi ll was missed, you might 
realize it was really held on your PC. Emergency situations are not a good time to 
fi nd out answers to these questions. 
\n\n=== PAGE 212 ===\n198
OTHER CONSIDERATIONS BEFORE GOING LIVE
 
■ Rollover Considerations 
 Many traders have diffi  culties accounting for rollovers. They wrongly assume they’ll 
have to “eat” the premium between the old and new months, or that they’ll pay multiple 
spreads to accomplish the roll. If you do it correctly, you don’t have to pay a premium, 
but you may have to pay two bid/ask spread costs instead of one, and you’ll have to pay 
the equivalent of one round turn commission. A lot of people are under the mistaken 
impression that they always lose or gain premium during a rollover. While this might 
be true for strategies such as scale trading, it does not have to be true for algorithmic 
systems with a simple rollover. I’ll explain all of that with a real‐world example. 
 First, it is worth explaining  why a rollover is necessary. For intraday traders, where
y
positions are closed at the end of each trading day, rollover should never be an issue.
On the day of rollover, those traders simply start trading the new front contract 
month. For swing traders, however, the situation is a bit more complicated. Before
fi rst notice day or last trading day, whichever comes fi rst, the trader must “roll” his 
position from the old contract month into the new contract month. For instance, if 
you are long September euros, you’ll want to sell the September euros, closing you 
out of that position, and buy the December euros. Not surprisingly, the devil is in the 
details, and an example is the best way to show the process. 
 Let’s say I have a system that trades the euro. I use the back‐adjusted continuous 
contract to calculate all parameters for the strategy. I am currently trading the 
September contract, but let’s say I roll to December this afternoon 
 Based on the signal from my continuous contract chart, I bought the September 
contract at 1.3272 a few days ago. At that time, September was the front month; the 
continuous contract thinks I entered at 1.3272. 
 This system has a $625 stop‐loss, and a $1,250 profi t target. So my stop loss is at 
1.3222, and my profi t target is at 1.3372. Both of those are based on the September 
contract, which is what was the lead contract at initial entry.
 Now, a few days later, I have to roll the position into December. Let’s fi rst look 
at the math, and what happens to the continuous contract, and why I don’t lose the 
premium (diff erence) between the two contracts when I roll over. Right at rollover, 
let’s say December was at 1.3303, while September was at 1.3299. This is a diff er-
ence of .0004, which is what the back‐adjusted continuous contract needs to know. 
To adjust the continuous contract to have December as the front month, you simply 
have to add .0004 to each price point in the existing continuous contract. So we do 
this and now have a continuous contract, with December as the front month. 
 Now, if you have your trading strategy applied to the updated continuous con-
tract, the strategy will think you bought at 1.3276, with a stop‐loss at 1.3226 and a
profi t target of 1.3376. “But wait!” you say. “I didn’t buy at 1.3276. I somehow got 
screwed!” Here’s the math, neglecting the bid/ask spread and the commission costs,
just for this example. 
\n\n=== PAGE 213 ===\n199
OTHER CONSIDERATIONS BEFORE GOING LIVE
 Real World—What Your Actual Trading Account Sees 
 You bought September at 1.3272. You sold September at 1.3299. Profi t = 
$337.50. 
 You bought December at 1.3303. Current price is 1.3303. Profi t = $0.
 In the real world, you have a closed profi t of $337.50, an open profi t of $0.
 If your new stop‐loss gets hit, you will lose (1.3226 − 1.3303) * 125,000 = −962.50.
Add that to the previously closed profi t of $337.50, and your total loss is $625.
 If your new profi t target gets hit, you will gain (1.3376 − 1.3303) * 125,000 =
+912.50. Add that to the previously closed profi t of $337.50, and your total 
gain is $1,250. 
 Strategy World—What Your Strategy, Acting on a Back‐Adjusted 
Continuous Contract,  Thinks Is Happening
 For the original continuous contract scenario, the continuous contract thinks I 
entered at 1.3272. 
 This system has a $625 stop‐loss, and a $1,250 profi t target. So my stop‐loss is at 
1.3222, and my profi t target is at 1.3372.
 For the new rolled‐over continuous contract scenario, the continuous contract 
thinks I entered at 1.3276. 
 This system has a $625 stop loss, and a $1,250 profi t target. So my stop loss is at 
1.3226, and my profi t target is at 1.3376.
 As you can see, the profi t and loss from the real world and the strategy world is 
exactly the same. 
 Suppose you are long the September euro contract at 1.3222, and it is getting to 
the time in mid‐September when you must roll over to the December contract.
When you have to perform this rollover in an algorithmic strategy, how do you 
actually accomplish it? I usually do it one of three diff erent ways. Each one has 
its advantages and disadvantages. 
 Method 1: Quick Roll (Most Expensive Typically) 
 In this approach, you enter a sell order at the market in September euro, and enter 
a buy order at the market in December euro. Since both orders are market orders, 
they will be immediately executed. Using the prices above, here is the math: 
 Sell September at 1.3299 (bid price)
 Buy December at 1.3304 (ask price)
 Closed profi t = $962.50 − $5.00 commission = $957.50
 Open profi t = Long from 1.3304
 Advantages: Guaranteed fi ll, quick, easy
\n\n=== PAGE 214 ===\n200
OTHER CONSIDERATIONS BEFORE GOING LIVE
 Disadvantages: You pay two bid/ask spreads, and if you are not quick with second 
order, market could run away from you, costing you money.
 Method 2: Leg in Roll (Cheapest Method Typically  
if  Done Correctly)
 In this approach, you enter a sell order at the market in September euro, and try 
to work a buy order at the bid price in December euro. The sell is immediately ex-
ecuted, and the buy is a limit order, which hopefully will get fi lled at the price you 
want. You could also do this in reverse: sell on a limit order, and then when you are 
fi lled, immediately buy with a market order. You probably should use the limit order 
on the side with the biggest spread, and the market order on the tight spread. Using
the prices above, here is the math: 
 Sell September at 1.3299 (bid price)
 Buy December at 1.3303 (bid price) 
 Closed profi t = $962.50 − $5.00 commission = $957.50
 Open profi t = Long from 1.3303
 Advantages: You save yourself $12.50 by getting in the December contract one 
tick better than you did with method 1. 
 Disadvantages: More complicated, plus you may have to chase the market up to 
get the December fi ll. You can easily lose more than one tick by trying to be too
greedy with your limit order.
 Method 3: Exchange Supported Spread Roll (Cost Usually between 
Methods 1 and 2)
 The exchanges have a great tool to help spreaders—a dedicated quote feed and trad-
able symbol for executing spread orders, which is what a rollover is. In this case, you 
are buying or selling the spread, not the individual legs. You get simultaneously fi lled 
on both legs at the same time. Using the prices above, here is the math: 
 Buy spread at 4.5 (ask price). Note that this doesn’t tell you the actual execution 
prices. You’ll see these on your statement, and they are really irrelevant. So, we will 
just assume some prices, keeping the spread fi ll price correct:
 Sell September at 1.3329 
 Buy December at 1.3329 + .00045 = 1.33035
 Closed profi t = $962.50 − $5.00 commission = $957.50
 Open profi t = Long from 1.33035
 Advantages: Simple, no chance of only one leg executing, cost usually in between 
methods 1 and 2. 
 Disadvantages: Some brokers don’t support this. For example, TradeStation’s 
main platform for automated trading does not allow this. You can do it manually in 
TradeStation Futures 4.0 platform, but that platform is not made for algorithmic 
\n\n=== PAGE 215 ===\n201
OTHER CONSIDERATIONS BEFORE GOING LIVE
strategies. It is also easy to screw up the order, and buy the spread instead of sell-
ing it. You have to be careful. Also, don’t think that just because you are trading the 
spread symbol, you’ll pay only one commission. Some people think this is true, and
I guess those folks don’t read their statements very closely. When the brokerage does 
its accounting, it splits the spread into a separate buy and sell fi ll for each leg. When
this happens, commission is charged for each. There is no free lunch, commission‐
wise, with this method! 
 You can see from the above example there is $12.50 cost diff erence between all 
three methods, with method 1 being the most expensive, method 2 being the cheap-
est, and method 3 in between the other two. This is not always the case, but is true
in general. 
 One method I did not mention above is to use limit orders on both sides of the 
spread. Astute readers have probably already thought about this method, and how 
it could save the spread on each side of the rollover. There is a reason I have not in-
cluded it, and that is because it is a terrible thing to do. In theory, the approach saves
you two spreads, but in reality one spread will be fi lled and the price will more often 
than not run away from your second limit order, leaving you with half a rollover (in 
other words, fl at). Thus, the times this approach does work are completely overshad-
owed by times the approach does not work. In the end, it will cost you much more to 
try and save a few dollars in spread costs. Therefore, I recommend one of the three 
methods above, completing the rollover quickly, and then moving on to other trad-
ing endeavors. 
 That is how a rollover is actually accomplished. Whenever I can, I use the 
exchange‐supported spreads to do my rollovers. I can do this with systems where I
enter orders manually. For my fully automated systems, I generally use method 1, 
even though it is the most expensive. When I use method 2, I sometimes fi nd myself 
chasing the market with my order, or worse yet, I forget about the rollover for a 
while, leaving me temporarily doubly exposed, until I fi x it.
\n\n=== PAGE 216 ===\n\n\n=== PAGE 217 ===\n Monitoring a
Live Strategy
 PA R T  V I 
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 217 ===\npean

MONITORING A
LivE STRATEGY
\n\n=== PAGE 218 ===\n\n\n=== PAGE 219 ===\n205
 I
n factories, when a machine makes parts, the operations are closely monitored and 
the dimensions closely checked. The idea is to ensure that the part‐making process 
is going smoothly, and to give an early warning signal when things are beginning to 
go bad. The same process holds true in evaluating live trading systems. I use a variety 
of tools to monitor strategies I am trading or that I am incubating.
 The fi rst chart I use is what I call a “bird’s‐eye view” chart, as shown in Figure  23.1 . 
It tells me, at a glance, how my strategy has performed historically and in real time. 
To keep consistency, I use the same data source for all the data. In my case, it is the 
Trade List provided by TradeStation. You can get similar data from just about every 
trading platform.  This is  not actual real money data,
t
 which will be covered in later 
charts and metrics. 
 The point of this chart will be to gauge the general overall eff ectiveness of real‐
time performance (the portion of the curve on the right). Are the real‐time data 
consistent with the historical test and the incubation period data? If not, there may 
be something amiss. Maybe the strategy has stopped working correctly, due to 
market conditions, for example. Or maybe the assumptions made in the strategy 
about limit order fi lls are not realistic. This could especially be true in scalping‐type 
strategies, although really you may need actual real‐money results to check that. 
Bad assumptions or strategy development technique up front may not show up in 
 The Ins and Outs
of Monitoring a
Live Strategy 
g
 C H A P T E R   2 3  
\n\n=== PAGE 220 ===\n206
THE INS AND OUTS OF MONITORING A LIVE STRATEGY
historical or incubation tests, but they certainly will be revealed when real money is 
on the line.
 I update this chart every few weeks and quickly review it. This gives me a general 
feeling whether my strategy is performing as expected. If it is, I can quickly move on 
to the next chart. 
 If you don’t know how to create an equity chart as shown in Figure  23.1 , here is 
how to create it.
 
■ How to Build an Equity Curve
(and a Drawdown Curve, Too!)
 Sometimes, after 20‐plus years of trading, some tasks become so rote and routine to 
me that I forget that I had to learn them at one point. Such is the case with creating 
equity and drawdown curves. It is simple to me, but to someone who has never done 
it before, it can be a daunting task. So, I’ll go through the math behind creating an 
equity curve and a drawdown curve.
 Equity Curve
 The equity curve can be built on a closed trade‐by‐trade basis, or on any time scale 
you wish. I like using a daily equity chart, in part to eliminate the noise from intraday 
 FIGURE 23.1  Bird’s‐Eye Equity Chart
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 220 ===\n3

RING A LIVE STRATEGY

THE INS AND OUTS OF MONI

150000 7

_—__. f
40000 |... = Weikfonara econ td
— inebaton ; ina
we
~ Real Money <
— Drawdown jaf

Walkforward

30000 |

20000 }

‘Net Pront

10000 +

+
07196109 sonei2 “Wosis13 1172213 site

FIGURE 23.1 _Bird’s-Eye Equity Chart

historical or incubation tests, but they certainly will be revealed when real money is
on the line.

T update this chart every few weeks and quickly review it. This gives me a general
feeling whether my strategy is performing as expected. If it is, I can quickly move on
to the next chart.

If you don’t know how to create an equity chart as shown in Figure 23.1, here is
how to create it.

= How to Build an Equity Curve
(and a Drawdown Curve, Too!)

Sometimes, after 20-plus years of trading, some tasks become so rote and routine to
me that I forget that I had to learn them at one point. Such is the case with creating
equity and drawdown curves. It is simple to me, but to someone who has never done
it before, it can be a daunting task. So, I’ll go through the math behind creating an
equity curve and a drawdown curve.

Equity Curve

The equity curve can be built on a closed trade-by-trade basis, or on any time scale
you wish. I like using a daily equity chart, in part to eliminate the noise from intraday
\n\n=== PAGE 221 ===\n207
THE INS AND OUTS OF MONITORING A LIVE STRATEGY
price changes. You can use your daily account statement to get your current equity 
balance. 
 Here is exactly how to build an equity curve based on daily data:
 Day 0 equity = Initial starting balance
 Day 1 equity = Day 0 equity + Change in equity during day 1
 Day 2 equity = Day 1 equity + Change in equity during day 2
 And so on …
 Then, you simply plot the day X equity values, and you have your equity curve. 
 Drawdown Curve 
 The drawdown curve is the diff erence, on any given day, between that day’s equity, 
and the  maximum equity up to that point. So, let’s say an account starts out with
$10,000 on day 0. On day 1, it hits a new equity high of $10,500. The drawdown
on day 1, since it is a new equity high, is $0. On day 2, let’s say the equity falls to
$9,700. Now, the drawdown on day 2 is $10,500 − $9,700 = $800. And so it goes 
through the rest of the days. On days where a new equity is reached, the drawdown 
will simply be $0. On all other days, the drawdown will be the diff erence between
that day’s equity and the maximum equity up until that point. 
 Day X drawdown = Minimum of $0 or (Day X equity − Max equity from day 0 
to day X) 
 A spreadsheet to create equity and drawdown curves is included at the web site 
(www.wiley.com/go/algotradingsystems) and the resource web site for this book. 
 
■Monthly Summary Chart
 When I used to work in aerospace (or the “real world,” as I sometimes refer to it), 
our small company ($250 million annual sales) would have a weekly sales and pro-
duction meeting called “How We Doin’.” Incorrect grammar aside, it was an excel-
lent way for the managers of the company to quickly see how sales were for the 
month and quarter, what quality and production problems were occurring, and just
a general sense of where the company currently stood. 
 Now, fast‐forward a few years. I am trading full time, working alone. But 
I still want to see at a glance “how I’m doin’” with my strategies and trading. 
Obviously, my account statements and equity curve tell the overall story, but 
that is not enough detail for me. What strategies are doing well? Which are 
underperforming? Of strategies I am incubating, how do they look? Should I 
make some changes in what I am trading? This “how I’m doin’” report can help 
me answer all of these questions. 
\n\n=== PAGE 222 ===\n208
THE INS AND OUTS OF MONITORING A LIVE STRATEGY
 I developed a spreadsheet to help me with this task. It tells me at a glance how 
my strategies are performing, and I can easily drill down and see detail if I need to.
 First, there is a summary page, shown in Figure  23.2 . I include every strategy I am 
trading live on this page. I also include, in another section, the strategies I am currently 
incubating. This summary sheet collects all the data I am interested in (of course, if you 
did this yourself, you’d likely pick diff erent metrics than I did). This summary sheet 
gets the data from the individual sheets, which I will describe a bit later. 
 To keep things simple, I base everything on one contract being traded, even though 
that is usually not what I am actually trading. Why? My goal with this spreadsheet is
to see how my strategies are doing compared to how I thought (calculated) they’d be
doing. If I included position sizing, it would muddy up the view for me. 
 Of all the numbers on this sheet, I am primarily interested in two columns:
 1.  Return effi  ciency. How am I doing, compared to my expectations? That is how
I defi ne return effi  ciency, and it is simply my actual return divided by my 
expected return. If my strategy is performing exactly as I had calculated, it will
be 100 percent. Obviously, I want this to be close to or above 100 percent.
Typically, when I take all the strategies together, I fi nd my effi  ciency is some-
where between 70 and 100 percent. So this says that if my historical testing says
I should make $10 a year, I am actually making somewhere between $7 and $10. 
 2.  Drawdown effi  ciency. This is how I am doing with regard to drawdown. Just like 
with return effi  ciency, I calculate this as my actual drawdown divided by my 
expected drawdown. I then subtract the result from 1, to make the number 
100 percent the ideal value. It is a bit backwards to do this, but I do it that way 
so that both effi  ciency numbers have 100 percent as their ideal value. Then, the
closer the effi  ciencies get to zero, the worse off  things are.
 Once a month, I go through and update each of the individual system sheets with 
performance data, and that automatically updates the main sheet. 
 The monthly summary sheet reveals my current performance for all strategies. It 
gets data from the individual strategy sheets. I have one page of my spreadsheet for 
each of the strategies I am currently trading or incubating. Figure  23.3 shows the
individual strategy summary sheet. It is pretty simple, yet pretty eff ective. I can see
at a quick glance how a strategy is performing, compared to my expectations (which, 
 FIGURE 23.2  Monthly Summary Chart 
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 222 ===\nNy

08

THE INS AND OUTS OF MONITORING A LIVE STRATEGY

‘kent Gain | Gain Monty 00_| Eeiciency
$7,956 _| $15,625 4.538
[59,976 | $105,576 x o

$21,906 | $18,472 5 | 11.330]
$37,952 | $18,130, is [13.001

12268 | $9211 4,028 |
‘$7,684 | $2,820

FIGURE 23.2 Monthly Summary Chart

I developed a spreadsheet to help me with this task. It tells me at a glance how
my strategies are performing, and I can easily drill down and see detail if I need to.

First, there is a summary page, shown in Figure 23.2. I include every strategy I am
trading live on this page. I also include, in another section, the strategies I am currently
incubating, This summary sheet collects all the data I am interested in (of course, if you
did this yourself, you'd likely pick different metrics than I did). This summary sheet
gets the data from the individual sheets, which I will describe a bit later.

To keep things simple, I base everything on one contract being traded, even though
that is usually not what I am actually trading. Why? My goal with this spreadsheet is
to see how my strategies are doing compared to how I thought (calculated) they’d be
doing, If I included position sizing, it would muddy up the view for me.

Of all the numbers on this sheet, I am primarily interested in two columns:

1. Return efficiency. How am I doing, compared to my expectations? That is how
I define return efficiency, and it is simply my actual return divided by my
expected return. If my strategy is performing exactly as I had calculated, it will
be 100 percent. Obviously, I want this to be close to or above 100 percent.
Typically, when I take all the strategies together, I find my efficiency is some-
where between 70 and 100 percent. So this says that if my historical testing says
Ishould make $10 a year, Iam actually making somewhere between $7 and $10.

2. Drawdown efficiency: This is how I am doing with regard to drawdown. Just like
with return efficiency, I calculate this as my actual drawdown divided by my
expected drawdown. I then subtract the result from 1, to make the number
100 percent the ideal value. It is a bit backwards to do this, but I do it that way
so that both efficiency numbers have 100 percent as their ideal value. Then, the
closer the efficiencies get to zero, the worse off things are.

Once a month, I go through and update each of the individual system sheets with
performance data, and that automatically updates the main sheet.

The monthly summary sheet reveals my current performance for all strategies. It
gets data from the individual strategy sheets. I have one page of my spreadsheet for
each of the strategies I am currently trading or incubating, Figure 23.3 shows the
individual strategy summary sheet. It is pretty simple, yet pretty effective. I can see
at a quick glance how a strategy is performing, compared to my expectations (which,
\n\n=== PAGE 223 ===\n209
 FIGURE 23.3  Individual System Monthly Chart 
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 223 ===\ney Appuopy worsss [enprtpuy "ez TUNDIAL

92'21$
ore TS
2€6'9$ £27'01$
919'1$ 102 6S
65518 Lr 8S
960 9S 9sh 1S
voe'ss ver 9s
082'2$ abn'ss
ores 680'°¥S
(6919) 290'€$
1ees sro'es
(8z0'+$) e0'ts
os os os
Toon om me 000'ss- quays 7098 “sodas SL Teaanog eyed Tenyoy|
vhobh eh Gh ek oe et e eb ef ef eb a a
“G4 -uer -28q -AON 490 -dag ny E}IN¢ -unp -AeW dy ye -Ga4 -Wer -29q ‘dM WoreaS TedK] PIeMUO)-HIEM|
os
‘00s"8s syeydeo [euoHON}
. (00218) sumopmesg Aepe.qul xeV\|
00's Os wold Auow peyedx3|
ae oooo1s | Uoneiseper | eapeal Aeuow reel
Lao Bee , Wye siequosqns
OOS: NeUeCA 20-E10e TeuIeN eoedsy1OM|
SHS Z Tewen A6a}24$
cows | NVQ OANA “
\n\n=== PAGE 224 ===\n210
THE INS AND OUTS OF MONITORING A LIVE STRATEGY
of course, are based on historical performance). When you have 30 to 50 strategies
to keep track of, a quick summary like this is really invaluable.
 For many strategies I trade, that is all the information I need—a quick view at 
performance. If something catches my eye, I can always dig deeper.
 On a monthly basis, the only number I have to update is in the “actual” column. 
This represents the actual profi t or loss for the strategy for that particular month. It
can be taken from trading statements, after adjusting for the number of contracts, or
it can be taken from the strategy performance report. I typically do the latter. The 
expected numbers can all be obtained from walk‐forward historical testing. 
 The max drawdown is obtained from the strategy report. Note that this is an in-
traday value, where the drawdown the spreadsheet calculates is on a monthly basis.
This obviously is not totally correct, as ideally you would want to compare draw-
downs over the same length of time. But for my purposes it is adequate.
 One way that the individual monthly performance chart can be of great assistance 
is by identifying strategies that are performing too well. Too well?  Yes, performance
that is too good can be a bad thing. 
 An example is shown in Figure  23.4 . I started incubating this strategy a while 
back, and it took off .
 It was “too good to be true”—way above its historical norm. For that reason I 
decided to keep incubating it. The next few months are shown in Figure  23.5 . 
 Now the strategy is in line with historical norms, but the standard deviation of 
monthly performance is a killer (look at the down‐month performances). I looked
r
into it further and saw that the system was not acting normal. So I decided to keep
incubating. Figure  23.6 shows what happened. 
 This is a good example of (1) performance that is too good being a bad thing, (2) 
standard deviation of results (high degree of variability seen from visual inspection) being 
an early warning sign that things were not quite right, and (3) the monthly performance 
 FIGURE 23.4  Superb Incubation Performance
$14,000
$12,000
Expected results
Incubation results
May-11
Jun-11
Jul-11
Aug-11
Sep-11
$10,000
$8,000
$6,000
Profit ($)
$4,000
$2,000
$0
−$2,000
−$4,000
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 224 ===\nTHE INS AND OUTS OF MONITORING A LIVE STRATEGY |

S

of course, are based on historical performance). When you have 30 to 50 strategies
to keep track of, a quick summary like this is really invaluable.

For many strategies I trade, that is all the information I need—a quick view at
performance. If something catches my eye, I can always dig deeper.

On a monthly basis, the only number I have to update is in the “actual” column.
This represents the actual profit or loss for the strategy for that particular month. It
can be taken from trading statements, after adjusting for the number of contracts, or
it can be taken from the strategy performance report. I typically do the latter. The
expected numbers can all be obtained from walk-forward historical testing,

The max drawdown is obtained from the strategy report. Note that this is an in-
traday value, where the drawdown the spreadsheet calculates is on a monthly basi:

This obviously is not totally correct, as ideally you would want to compare draw-
downs over the same length of time. But for my purposes it is adequate.

One way that the individual monthly performance chart can be of great assistance
is by identifying strategies that are performing too well. Too well? Yes, performance
that is too good can be a bad thing.

An example is shown in Figure 23.4. I started incubating this strategy a while
back, and it took off.

It was “too good to be true”—way above its historical norm. For that reason I
decided to keep incubating it. The next few months are shown in Figure 23.5.

Now the strategy is in line with historical norms, but the standard deviation of
monthly performance is a killer (look at the down-month performances). I looked
into it further and saw that the system was not acting normal. So I decided to keep
incubating. Figure 23.6 shows what happened.

This is a good example of (1) performance that is too good being a bad thing, (2)
standard deviation of results (high degree of variability seen from visual inspection) being
an early warning sign that things were not quite right, and (3) the monthly performance

$14,000
$12,000
$10,000
$8,000
$6,000
$4,000
$2,000
$0
-$2,000
-$4,000

> = Expected results
—— Incubation results

Profit ($)

May-11 Jun-11 Jul Aug-11 Sep-11

FIGURE 23.4 Superb Incubation Performance
\n\n=== PAGE 225 ===\n211
THE INS AND OUTS OF MONITORING A LIVE STRATEGY
 FIGURE 23.5  Most Strategies Eventually Revert to Their Mean 
Incubation results
Profit ($)
−$5,000
May-11
Jun-11
Jul-11
Aug-11
Sep-11
Oct-11
Nov-11
Dec-11
Jan-12
Feb-12
Mar-12
Apr-12
May-12
Jun-12
Jul-12
Aug-12
Sep-12
Oct-12
$0
$5,000
$10,000
$15,000
$20,000
$25,000
Expected results
 FIGURE 23.6 Incubating Even Longer 
$50,000
Expected results
Incubation results
$45,000
$40,000
$35,000
$30,000
$25,000
$20,000
Profit ($)
$15,000
$10,000
$5,000
$0
−$5,000
May-11
Jul-11
Sep-11
Nov-11
Jan-12
Mar-12
May-12
Jul-12
Sep-12
Nov-12
Jan-13
Mar-13
May-13
Jul-13
Sep-13
Nov-13
report showing all this information in an easy‐to‐digest format. As an epilogue: I am still 
incubating this particular strategy but have not traded it with real money. 
 So far, I have discussed a few diff erent ways to track the performance of a strategy. 
These tools are excellent for assessing the longer‐term performance of a system—
over a signifi cant period of time (months to years), is the strategy performing as it 
should? While this “view from 35,000 feet” is useful to have, you also need to have 
measurements at the weekly or daily level. This helps answer the question: is my new 
strategy performing to expectations? I use a couple of diff erent methods to review 
the shorter‐term performance. There is a simple way and a complicated way. First, 
I’ll look at the simple way.
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 225 ===\n$25,000

$20,000 7---/—— = Expected results

—s— Incubation results)

$15,000

$10,000

Profit ($)

$5,000

$0

-$5,000
OM @ VW @ WY

e ‘Ss ‘8 SS 7 ‘ye 3 ‘es ¥s Me WF Fy Wp?

FIGURE 23.5 Most Strategies Eventually Revert to Their Mean

report showing all this information in an easy-to-digest format. As an epilogue: I am still
incubating this particular strategy but have not traded it with real money.

So far, I have discussed a few different ways to track the performance of a strategy.
These tools are excellent for assessing the longer-term performance of a system—
over a significant period of time (months to years), is the strategy performing as it
should? While this “view from 35,000 feet” is useful to have, you also need to have
measurements at the weekly or daily level. This helps answer the question: is my new
strategy performing to expectations? I use a couple of different methods to review
the shorter-term performance. There is a simple way and a complicated way. First,
Pll look at the simple way.

$50,000
$45,000
$40,000 +---{= = = Expected results
$35,000 +---{#— Incubation results|

ge $30,000
= $25,000 4--~
$20,000
$15,000
$10,000
$5,000
$0
~$5,000 ——

Profi

oe er eee ae ee
ww * FSX KK WK S ¥ wer f

FIGURE 23.6 _ Incubating Even Longer

ADALVULS TAIT ¥ ONIOLINOW JO S.LNO CNY SNI SHA
\n\n=== PAGE 226 ===\n212
THE INS AND OUTS OF MONITORING A LIVE STRATEGY
 The only data you need for this is the average trade or average daily result. If you 
have the standard deviation of this value, then you can do even more. 
 All you do is plot your results, along with the equation “ n * avg ” where n is the 
trade number/day, and “ avg ” is the average value. You’ll get a chart like the one shown
in Figure  23.7 . 
 If you are above the average line, your strategy is doing better than you thought. 
If you are below, your strategy is worse.
 This chart becomes really useful as time goes on. Over 30 or more periods, you’d 
expect the strategy to be right around the average line. That is how I use it. Then, 
at a quick glance, I know the general state of the strategy. This chart is very similar 
to the monthly tracking chart shown earlier. It is nice, but it doesn’t convey a lot of 
information, especially early on in the life of a live strategy. To get more insight, add
two lines for the +/− standard deviation curves: 
 Upper curve:  n *  avg +  sqrt ( n ) * (std dev ) * 
v
X
Avg curve: n *  avg
 Lower curve: n *  avg −sqrt ( n ) * (std dev) * 
v
X
 where
n  =  The trade number 
avg  =  The average profi t per trade 
std dev  =  Standard deviation of the avg trade
v
X  =  Standard deviation multiplier
X
 FIGURE 23.7
 Daily Performance Review 
$5,000
Average expected
Actual P/L
$4,000
$3,000
$2,000
Net Profit
Day
$1,000
$0
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
−$1,000
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 226 ===\n2
>
a
az
wi
>
A
<
Z

THE INS AND OUTS OF MON

NR

The only data you need for this is the average trade or average daily result. If you
have the standard deviation of this value, then you can do even more.

All you do is plot your results, along with the equation “n * avg” where n is the
trade number/day, and “avg” is the average value. You'll get a chart like the one shown
in Figure 23.7.

If you are above the average line, your strategy is doing better than you thought.
If you are below, your strategy is worse.

This chart becomes really useful as time goes on. Over 30 or more periods, you'd
expect the strategy to be right around the average line. That is how I use it. Then,
at a quick glance, I know the general state of the strategy. This chart is very similar
to the monthly tracking chart shown earlier. It is nice, but it doesn’t convey a lot of
information, especially early on in the life of a live strategy. To get more insight, add
two lines for the +/— standard deviation curves:

Upper curve: n * avg + sqrt(n) * (std dev) * X
Avg curve: n * avg
Lower curve: n * avg — sqrt(n) * (std dev) * X

where
n = The trade number
avg = The average profit per trade
std dev = Standard deviation of the avg trade
X = Standard deviation multiplier

$5,000

— Average expected

$4,000 )-) Actual P/L

= $3,000
2
<
%@ $2,000 }-
z

$1,000 }-

$0
-$1,000 :
5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
Day

FIGURE 23.7 Daily Performance Review
\n\n=== PAGE 227 ===\n213
THE INS AND OUTS OF MONITORING A LIVE STRATEGY
 What this tells you is that roughly 68 percent ( X = 1) or 95 percent (
X
X = 2) of the time,
X
your equity curve should be within the upper or lower bands. Most well‐performing 
strategies will have their equity curve within the standard deviation bands. If the equity 
curve is outside of those bands, maybe there is something wrong with your strategy.
 Figure  23.8 shows a sample strategy, with  X = 2 bands. The most interesting point
X
here is the bottom curve, the −2 standard deviation line. Look as it starts negative 
and stays negative. Imagine that! A winning (positive expectancy) system can still 
have negative results for quite a while. Pure random chance (the order of trade re-
sults) can lead a winning system to appear to be a losing system. 
 Of course, over time, the positive expectancy starts to dominate, and the lower 
curve will eventually turn positive. This has huge implications for the trader who
“tweaks” his method if, after fi ve trades, he is not showing a profi t. He may well have 
just changed a winning system! This lower curve really shows that it takes time for 
even a winning system to show profi ts.
 Here is a great quote that explains it better than I can. It is from the book Trading 
Bases by Joe Peta (Penguin Books, 2013):
 Well, if you had the opportunity to invest in a venture with a 
positive expected value, like ownership of a roulette wheel, would 
you prefer to own it for one hour or nine and a half hours? Funny 
things can happen in one hour; there is no guarantee of a profi t even 
with the house edge. But over nine and a half hours, the natural 
fl uctuations inherent in the game will smooth out, and the chances 
of losing money will be very small, approaching zero over time. 
 FIGURE 23.8
 Daily Performance Review with Performance Bands 
$10,000
Average expected
Actual P/L
−2 Sigma
+2 Sigma
$8,000
$4,000
$6,000
$2,000
Net Profit ($)
Day
$0
−$2,000
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
−$4,000
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 227 ===\nWhat this tells you is that roughly 68 percent (X = 1) or 95 percent (X = 2) of the time,
your equity curve should be within the upper or lower bands. Most well-performing
strategies will have their equity curve within the standard deviation bands. If the equity
curve is outside of those bands, maybe there is something wrong with your strategy.

Figure 23.8 shows a sample strategy, with XY = 2 bands. The most interesting point
here is the bottom curve, the —2 standard deviation line. Look as it starts negative
and stays negative. Imagine that! A winning (positive expectancy) system can still
have negative results for quite a while. Pure random chance (the order of trade re-
sults) can lead a winning system to appear to be a losing system.

Of course, over time, the positive expectancy starts to dominate, and the lower
curve will eventually turn positive. This has huge implications for the trader who
“tweaks” his method if, after five trades, he is not showing a profit. He may well have
just changed a winning system! This lower curve really shows that it takes time for
even a winning system to show profits.

Here is a great quote that explains it better than I can. It is from the book Trading
Bases by Joe Peta (Penguin Books, 2013):

Well, if you had the opportunity to invest in a venture with a
positive expected value, like ownership of a roulette wheel, would
you prefer to own it for one hour or nine and a half hours? Funny
things can happen in one hour; there is no guarantee of a profit even
with the house edge. But over nine and a half hours, the natural
fluctuations inherent in the game will smooth out, and the chances
of losing money will be very small, approaching zero over time.

$10,000
— Average expected
— +2 Sigma
$8,000}-) “bo gigma | eb
+ Actual P/L
$6,000
=
S $4,000
«
2 $2,000
$0
-$2,000
$4,000 “ . : :
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45° 50
Day

FIGURE 23.8 Daily Performance Review with Performance Bands

N
w

NOW dO S.LNO CNY SNI SHA

Zz
>
5
2
5
5
z
8
\n\n=== PAGE 228 ===\n214
THE INS AND OUTS OF MONITORING A LIVE STRATEGY
 Astute readers will recognize that the graph in Figure  23.8 uses standard devia-
tion and therefore assumes the trade results have a normal distribution. In reality,
most trading systems do not have a normal distribution. Rather, the distribution will
likely have a spike in negative territory, where a stop loss might be placed, and they
will have an extended tail on the profi t side, or a spike in positive territory, corre-
sponding to a profi t target. An example of a real trading system histogram, versus the 
normally distributed version, is shown in Figure  23.9 . Depending on the specifi cs of 
the actual trades, assuming a normal distribution may be a bad idea.
 To alleviate this concern, we can simply take the Monte Carlo results from nu-
merous runs and use percentiles based on them. This will provide a more accurate 
representation of the expected bounds of the trading system.
 A simple example can help explain this approach, before I apply it to the actual 
trading data. Assume that we have a trading system that averages $100 per day, with 
a standard deviation of plus or minus $50. With two standard deviation bands, we 
expect roughly 95 percent of the values to fall in between the upper and lower 
curves, or the 97.7 percentile on the upper end and 2.3 percentile on the lower end.
If we then run Monte Carlo analysis on a trade‐by‐trade basis, for each trading day
we simply select the values at the 2.3 and 97.7 percentiles. Since these values use 
the actual data, not an assumed normal distribution, they should be more accurate 
and representative of the actual trading system. The drawback is that the curves will 
not be smooth and could change if the simulation is rerun. Such are the penalties for
using Monte Carlo analysis. 
 If we run the day‐by‐day Monte Carlo analysis on the euro trading system, how do 
the curves compare? There is a good, but not perfect, match between the standard
 FIGURE 23.9  Histogram of a Typical Real Trading System 
100
90
80
70
60
50
Frequency
$425
stop-loss
causes spike
Daily Profit/Loss
40
30
20
10
−1000
−700
−400
−100
200
500
800
1100
1400
1700
2000
0
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 228 ===\nTHE INS AND OUTS OF MONITORING A LIVE STRATEGY |

z

Astute readers will recognize that the graph in Figure 23.8 uses standard devia-
tion and therefore assumes the trade results have a normal distribution. In reality,
most trading systems do not have a normal distribution. Rather, the distribution will
likely have a spike in negative territory, where a stop loss might be placed, and they
will have an extended tail on the profit side, or a spike in positive territory, corre-
sponding to a profit target. An example of a real trading system histogram, versus the
normally distributed version, is shown in Figure 23.9. Depending on the specifics of
the actual trades, assuming a normal distribution may be a bad idea.

To alleviate this concern, we can simply take the Monte Carlo results from nu-
merous runs and use percentiles based on them. This will provide a more accurate
representation of the expected bounds of the trading system.

A simple example can help explain this approach, before I apply it to the actual
trading data. Assume that we have a trading system that averages $100 per day, with
a standard deviation of plus or minus $50. With two standard deviation bands, we
expect roughly 95 percent of the values to fall in between the upper and lower
curves, or the 97.7 percentile on the upper end and 2.3 percentile on the lower end.
If we then run Monte Carlo analysis on a trade-by-trade basis, for each trading day
we simply select the values at the 2.3 and 97.7 percentiles. Since these values use
the actual data, not an assumed normal distribution, they should be more accurate
and representative of the actual trading system. The drawback is that the curves will
not be smooth and could change if the simulation is rerun. Such are the penalties for
using Monte Carlo analysis.

If we run the day-by-day Monte Carlo analysis on the euro trading system, how do
the curves compare? There is a good, but not perfect, match between the standard

400 400
90 90
80 sins 80
70 <.. stop-loss + 70

Z 60 causes spike |

3 50 50

E 40 40
30 30
20 20
10 - 10
0 0
SLE LEP PSPS

Daily Profit/Loss

FIGURE 23.9 Histogram of a Typical Real Trading System
\n\n=== PAGE 229 ===\n215
THE INS AND OUTS OF MONITORING A LIVE STRATEGY
deviation and the Monte Carlo lines. Either is probably acceptable for tracking pur-
poses. I personally like the Monte Carlo version, since it does not make any assump-
tions about the underlying data. 
 
■How to Use This Graph 
 The daily tracking graph can be used to help you quit trading a system. For exam-
ple, if the real‐time performance of your strategy falls below the lower 10 percent
line, it could mean that your system is no longer working. After all, the odds were
90 percent that your strategy should be performing better than this. An example of 
a real‐world system should make this crystal clear. 
 Figure  23.10 shows a sample case of a real‐world system I traded with my own 
money.
Curve 1:  The system performance after 140 days. Barely positive, and close to
the −1 Sigma line. That means, at that point, only 16 percent of the randomly gener-
ated equity curves, based on the historical back‐test trades, would have been worse 
than this. 
 I’m sure most people would have stopped trading at this point. I did not, since I 
knew that even with the bad performance there was a chance that the system was
not fundamentally broken. 
Curve 2: The curve for the next 200+ days (Figure  23.11 ). I kept the system 
running, and now it is performing closer to its expected value. 
 As I explained earlier, I use Monte Carlo simulation to determine if a strategy is 
performing to expectations. It is basically the same result as with using mean and 
 FIGURE 23.10
140‐Day Daily Performance 
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 229 ===\ndeviation and the Monte Carlo lines. Either is probably acceptable for tracking pur-
poses. I personally like the Monte Carlo version, since it does not make any assump-
tions about the underlying data.

= How to Use This Graph

The daily tracking graph can be used to help you quit trading a system. For exam-
ple, if the real-time performance of your strategy falls below the lower 10 percent
line, it could mean that your system is no longer working. After all, the odds were
90 percent that your strategy should be performing better than this. An example of
a real-world system should make this crystal clear.

Figure 23.10 shows a sample case of a real-world system I traded with my own
money.

Curve 1: The system performance after 140 days. Barely positive, and close to
the —1 Sigma line. That means, at that point, only 16 percent of the randomly gener-
ated equity curves, based on the historical back-test trades, would have been worse
than this.

I’m sure most people would have stopped trading at this point. I did not, since I
knew that even with the bad performance there was a chance that the system was
not fundamentally broken.

Curve 2: The curve for the next 200+ days (Figure 23.11). I kept the system
running, and now it is performing closer to its expected value.

As I explained earlier, I use Monte Carlo simulation to determine if a strategy is
performing to expectations. It is basically the same result as with using mean and

$30,000

900,000 |...) —*—Actual

vata, Expected

+1 Sigma

—+1 Sigma

“Expected _

FIGURE 23.10 140-Day Daily Performance

a

ADALVULS TAIT ¥ ONIOLINOW JO S.LNO CNY SNI SHA
\n\n=== PAGE 230 ===\n216
THE INS AND OUTS OF MONITORING A LIVE STRATEGY
standard deviation, except that you can include “boundary condition” eff ects with 
Monte Carlo (like quitting after a certain percentage drawdown or quitting when
account gets blown out).
 
■ Tracking Expected and Actual Performance 
 In all the examples I have shown in this chapter, I have used the performance num-
bers generated by the back‐testing software, which was TradeStation in my case.
These numbers have built in certain assumptions about:
 
■ Amount of slippage per trade. 
 
■ Amount of commissions per trade.
 
■ Fill logic for limit orders.
 
■ “Perfect” trading versus real‐world trading.
 Depending on your trading system and the values you put in the back‐test soft-
ware, you may or may not have a realistic view of how your system will perform in 
the real world. I’m sure you’ve experienced this—you see a terrifi c‐looking equity 
curve only to fi nd out later that the creator did not include commissions or slippage
in the performance data. Or you discovered an unbeatable scalping system for the 
mini S&P, only to discover, upon further review, that your back‐test engine assumed
limit order fi lls as soon as the price was just touched, not when the limit order price 
 FIGURE 23.11
 200‐Day Daily Performance 
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 230 ===\nTHE INS AND OUTS OF MONITORING A LIVE STRATEGY |

a

$70,000

‘$80,000

#50,000 +...

$40,000

Net Profit

$30,000

$20,000 }--

‘$10,000

10,000

FIGURE 23.11 200-Day Daily Performance

standard deviation, except that you can include “boundary condition” effects with
Monte Carlo (like quitting after a certain percentage drawdown or quitting when
account gets blown out).

| Tracking Expected and Actual Performance

In all the examples I have shown in this chapter, I have used the performance num-
bers generated by the back-testing software, which was TradeStation in my case.
These numbers have built in certain assumptions about:

= Amount of slippage per trade.

= Amount of commissions per trade.

= Fill logic for limit orders.

= “Perfect” trading versus real-world trading.

Depending on your trading system and the values you put in the back-test soft-
ware, you may or may not have a realistic view of how your system will perform in
the real world. I’m sure you've experienced this—you see a terrific-looking equity
curve only to find out later that the creator did not include commissions or slippage
in the performance data. Or you discovered an unbeatable scalping system for the
mini S&P, only to discover, upon further review, that your back-test engine assumed
limit order fills as soon as the price was just touched, not when the limit order price
\n\n=== PAGE 231 ===\n217
THE INS AND OUTS OF MONITORING A LIVE STRATEGY
was exceeded (this is a very common mistake, especially with many so‐called trad-
ing simulators out there). Finally, you will have Internet outages, data delays, and all
sorts of other little gremlins. The point is that the performance you expect is not the
performance that you’ll get. 
 If you are treating your trading as a business, it is imperative that you track actual 
performance and compare it to predicted performance. After all, when your actual 
performance is below your expected performance, isn’t that akin to something or
someone stealing from you? It sure feels that way to me—I fully anticipate to achieve 
the predicted performance or better, and when I don’t, I search for and correct the
reason.
 I track my actual performance on the daily tracking graph. I also keep a running 
table of actual versus predicted performance. Most of the time, the actual perfor-
mance does slightly better than the predicted performance. This is a very good thing,
as it shows that my assumptions for commissions, slippage, and the like were a bit 
on the conservative side. I’d rather be conservative in my estimates and be pleasantly 
surprised with actual performance, as opposed to underestimating slippage and later
being disappointed. 
\n\n=== PAGE 232 ===\n\n\n=== PAGE 233 ===\n219
 W
hen I take a new strategy live, I like to review the performance on an ongoing 
basis, to make sure things are going more or less as expected. For my euro 
day and night strategy, which I started live trading in late August 2013, here are my 
real‐time updates every three to four weeks of trading it, for the fi rst four months, 
along with a discussion of a few interesting events that came up along the way.
 
■ Four-Week Review—September 13, 2013, End Date
 Week 4 of trading the euro day and night system with actual money is now com-
plete. For the fi rst few months of live trading, every four weeks or so, I review the 
current performance of the system as shown in Figure  24.1 , and answer some standard 
questions. This information may be useful should the performance of the system 
become erratic—maybe there was something I could have seen earlier, or something I 
just plain out missed. 
Summary: Well, after four weeks of trading this system live, I am right where I 
started—breakeven. 
Am I surprised at this result? Absolutely not. It is well within expectations. 
Am I disappointed in the results so far?  Yes. Anytime I start a new strategy 
I want to make money at the beginning.  
Are results in line with expectations? Yes. The current profi t is below the 
average I expect, and it is above the lower 10 percent line. So, while it is un-
derperforming currently, I see no reason for alarm. Also, I have had two win-
ning weeks and two losing weeks. Over time, I expect about 60 percent of my 
weeks to be profi table, so the performance is just as I expect.
 Real Time
 C H A P T E R   2 4  
\n\n=== PAGE 234 ===\n220
REAL TIME
Are fi lls and trades live comparable to TradeStation strategy report?
Yes, in fact, in most cases my fi lls are better than what I had anticipated. Slippage 
is usually less than I had expected. 
Do I see any reason to stop trading this system? No. 
 D o I see any reason to change my position‐sizing plan, that is, reduce 
or increase my risk? No.
 
■ Update after Week 7 
 Seven weeks into trading this system live, and things went bad this week, with a 
couple of large losing days. The cumulative equity is hovering right around the 
10 percent line, which is generally a good warning sign that the system is not work-
ing the same as its historical test. If circumstances were diff erent, I might consider 
stopping trading this system. The things working against the “quit now” idea are: 
 1.  There are only 18 days of live trading data—too short, in my mind, to make a 
decision to quit. 
 2.  Most important, when I laid out the criteria for stopping live trading, perfor-
mance relative to the daily performance was not considered (sometimes I do 
consider this in my “when to quit” analysis). For this strategy, though, I used 
maximum drawdown as my stopping criteria. 
 I will keep on trading, realizing that things need to improve.
 FIGURE 24.1  Daily Performance, After Four Weeks of Live Trading 
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 234 ===\n220

a
z
2

Euro Day & Night Performance Tracking

$5,000 : 3 :
vevage Expected + Top 10% Expected
p 10% Expected A
$4,000 er 10% Expected

Perfect PiL
a Actual PIL

‘Average Expect

$2,000 ++»

Net Profit

$1,000

so

$1,000

$2,000 Day

FIGURE 24.1 Daily Performance, After Four Weeks of Live Trading

Are fills and trades live comparable to TradeStation strategy report?
Yes, in fact, in most cases my fills are better than what I had anticipated. Slippage
is usually less than I had expected.

Do I see any reason to stop trading this system? No.

Do I see any reason to change my position-sizing plan, that is, reduce
or increase my risk? No.

| Update after Week 7

Seven weeks into trading this system live, and things went bad this week, with a
couple of large losing days, The cumulative equity is hovering right around the
10 percent line, which is generally a good warning sign that the system is not work-
ing the same as its historical test. If circumstances were different, I might consider
stopping trading this system. The things working against the “quit now” idea are:

1, There are only 18 days of live trading data—too short, in my mind, to make a
decision to quit.

2. Most important, when I laid out the criteria for stopping live trading, perfor-
mance relative to the daily performance was not considered (sometimes I do

consider this in my “when to quit” analy:

is strategy, though, I used
maximum drawdown as my stopping criteria.

I will keep on trading, realizing that things need to improve.
\n\n=== PAGE 235 ===\n221
REAL TIME
 After seven weeks of live trading, is the system performing as designed? First, 
let’s look at the number of trades it has taken. A sharp increase or decrease in the
number of trades, when compared to the walk‐forward history, would suggest that 
the market action is diff erent than the historical market, causing many more, or far
fewer, trades to be taken than normal. After seven weeks, the system has traded 
for 18 days, or 53 percent of possible days. Historically, it trades about 151 days
per year, or 60 percent of days. So the system is trading less than the average. But 
some years it has traded as few as 130 days (51 percent) and as many as 175 days 
(70 percent). Based on all this, I’d conclude that the number of trades is generally 
in line with expectations, although at the low end. Anecdotally, I have felt that the
volatility has been lower than usual. There have been a handful of days where an entry 
was missed by only a few ticks (the big Fed move day, September 18, was a case in 
point). A little more volatility in the hours before the announcement and the system 
would have entered a big winner.
 Second, let’s look at average performance versus actual performance. The average 
historical performance of the system gives $1,441 profi t after 18 trading days. Actual 
performance, however, is at −$746. This is a huge discrepancy, and the conclusion
obviously is that the system is not performing as well as it should. But here is where is 
gets tricky. Take a coin and fl ip it 100 times. If you get 60 heads, do you conclude that
the coin is “broken,” that is, biased? What if you got 70 heads, or 80, or 90? Even if 
you fl ipped 100 heads in a row, could you absolutely conclude that the coin is biased? 
No! There is a chance, albeit very, very small, that a fair coin could be fl ipped heads 
100 consecutive times. 
 It is the same way with a trading system. You can ask, “Is it broken?,” but the 
answer will always have some degree of uncertainty. That uncertainty sometimes
makes all the diff erence to your conclusions and decisions. Some people take sta-
tistics as gospel, but I’ll relate a little secret I learned. Back in my previous career, I 
had a statistician who worked for me. I assigned a project to him that required a lot 
of data analysis and then some sort of conclusion. After he reviewed the details of 
the project, before he even started work, he asked me, “What conclusion would you 
like? I can make the data support your point of view, whatever it is.” I was astounded,
but I never forgot the lesson—statistics can be manipulated very easily, so be careful 
making any conclusions based on them. 
 Right now, the actual system performance is at the 10th percentile of what was 
expected. The 50th percentile would be right at the average, so the 10 percent 
mark is pretty bad. But it is still within the realm of possible outcomes. If it were 
below the 0 percentile—let’s say the system had lost $8,000 through the fi rst 
18 days—then the system obviously would not be performing as expected. That 
would be an easy decision. It is where there is uncertainty that things get tough. 
 There are statistical tests that could be run to show whether the current trades 
could be part of the historical distribution of trades, but even such advanced 
\n\n=== PAGE 236 ===\n222
REAL TIME
analysis is not defi nitive. There is always a gray area. So how do I navigate the gray 
area? First, I try to determine the parameters that will cause me to quit trading a 
system. I could certainly use the percentile number approach and have a quitting 
rule that says, “If after X days the performance is below the Yth percentile, I will 
cease trading.” X and Y would be at my discretion, based on personal preferences. 
As long as I stick to the rule I create at the start, I’d be doing fi ne. For me, and for 
this particular system, earlier I decided that I would quit only when I hit a $5,000 
drawdown. So I am not using the data in the tracking graph to decide when to quit. 
Sometimes I do use it, though.
 To summarize: 
Is the system performing as expected? No, not even close. It is performing 
much worse than expected.
Is the system “broken?” Maybe, maybe not. It depends on how you defi ne 
broken. One cannot say defi nitively it is broken or it is not broken. 
Am I going to quit? No. My quit point, established earlier, calls for a single‐
contract drawdown of $5,000. This was a well‐thought‐out amount, and I 
can’t just toss it out the window. I’m going to stick to the plan. I realize, 
though, that sticking to the plan might be akin to the captain sinking with 
the ship. 
 
■ Week 8 Review
 Week 8 of trading the euro day and night system with actual money is now complete.  
Summary: First, let’s look at the big picture. I like to do this regularly, because at 
a glance I can tell if things are going as planned or not. From looking at Figure  24.2 , 
a couple of things are clear: 
 1.  Over the whole course of the system history (walk‐forward, incubation, live), 
the system performance hasn’t changed much. I could draw a line from the start
of walk‐forward to the start of incubation, and then another line from the start 
of incubation until the present time, and the slopes of those two lines would 
be about the same. This gives me some reassurance that the system is behaving, 
subject to point 2. 
 2.  In Figure  24.3 , It is easy to see that the live trading (dark gray line with triangles) 
has not been up to par at all. The performance these past two months has
been down, and while it has not crashed and burned, it certainly has been a
disappointment. 
 After eight weeks of trading this system live, I am down about 5 percent from the 
start.  
\n\n=== PAGE 237 ===\n223
REAL TIME
 FIGURE 24.2
 Big Picture Equity Curve after Eight Weeks 
 FIGURE 24.3
 Daily Performance after Eight Weeks of Live Trading 
Am I surprised at this result? Absolutely not. It is well within expectations. 
Am I disappointed in the results so far?  Yes. After eight weeks, I had hoped
to be making some money. The performance these past eight weeks is way 
behind the long‐term average, so it is very disappointing.
Are results in line with expectations? Yes. The current profi t is below
the average I expect, and it is right around lower 10 percent line. So it is 
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 237 ===\n50000

“= Walktonward

40000

Drawdown
30000

20000

Net Pront

10000 ‘

o7mpoo ona 8/10 A fora? §— camti2 ~~ roi2 “Wosesns 11213 stone

10000

FIGURE 24.2 Big Picture Equity Curve after Eight Weeks

Am I surprised at this result? Absolutely not. It is well within expectations.

Am I disappointed in the results so far? Yes. After eight weeks, I had hoped
to be making some money. The performance these past eight weeks is way
behind the long-term average, so it is very disappointing,

Are results in line with expectations? Yes. The current profit is below
the average I expect, and it is right around lower 10 percent line. So it is

Euro Day & Night Performance Tracking
Rerage Expected

Net Profit

FIGURE 24.3 Daily Performance after Eight Weeks of Live Trading

nv
a

AWLL Tat
\n\n=== PAGE 238 ===\n224
REAL TIME
underperforming currently, and I will be concerned if equity drops below that 
10 percent line. Also, I have had four winning weeks and four losing weeks. 
Over time, I expect about 60 percent of my weeks to be profi table, so the per-
formance is a bit behind in that regard. Plus, one week was really, really bad.
Are fi lls and trades live comparable to TradeStation strategy report?
Yes, in fact, in most cases my fi lls are better than what I had anticipated. Slip-
page is usually less than I had expected. 
Do I see any reason to stop trading this system? No. 
Do I see any reason to change my position‐sizing plan, that is, reduce 
or increase my risk? No. 
 After eight weeks, I will keep on trading per the plan, but storm clouds are form-
ing on the horizon. I need some sunshine instead! 
 
■ Week 9—Automated Trading Issues 
 You’ve probably heard the phrase “automated trading does not mean unattended 
trading.”  You’ve also probably read all the disclaimers that the brokerage throws at 
you before they allow you to turn automation on. With TradeStation, for example, 
there are tons of disclaimers you have to sign when you open an account, and then
if you want to automate a strategy, there are two more disclaimers you have to click 
and accept. The fi rst disclaimer is 397 words, and the second is a whopping 593 
words. That is a lot of legalese to wade through just to automate your trading. 
 But all those warnings are there for a reason. Ignore them at your own risk. That’s 
what happened to me in week 9 of live trading. Let me explain.
 My euro day and night strategies enter on limit orders, which are supposed to be 
active for the current bar only. After the bar closes, any open orders get canceled by
the software. Depending on the strategy logic, another limit order may be placed for 
the current bar. 
 So, Monday night during week 9, my euro night strategy placed a limit order to 
buy, well below the market. It did not get fi lled during the bar, so it should have 
been canceled. For whatever reason, it was not canceled. This is the fi rst time I have
ever seen this occur. The success rate of the software auto‐canceling orders, from
r
my experience, has to be well over 99 percent. That is excellent, but errors can and 
do occur. Just look at the airline industry, for example. There are roughly 28,000 
commercial fl ights per day, and if even 99.99 percent had successful takeoff s and
landings, two or three planes would crash per day
 
. That’s where claims of 99 percent
y
plus uptime, accuracy, whatever are meaningless. Anything less than 100 percent 
perfection runs the risk of costing you money.
 The order rested at the exchange until 5 a.m. Tuesday morning, when it was fi lled.
I noticed this rouge position Wednesday morning. Of course, with Murphy’s Law in 
\n\n=== PAGE 239 ===\n225
REAL TIME
eff ect here, I noticed it not when the position was profi table, but after it had gone 
negative. Then, to add insult to injury, while I investigated the issue—before I exited 
the position—I watched it drop another $125 or so. Once I confi rmed that the posi-
tion was wrong, I exited with about a $550 loss.
 Who’s to blame here? Well, the software did not do its job, since it should have 
canceled the order. But, ultimately, I can blame no one, and no thing (software, In-
ternet connection, etc.), except myself for the error. I’ll repeat that: I am to blame! 
I am the caretaker, and if things go wrong, as they occasionally will, it is up to me to 
be aware of it and fi x it. I take full responsibility for this screw up, and I added some
steps to make sure it is not repeated: 
 1.  Check statements every day. If I had checked it that fi rst morning, I’d have prob-
ably exited with a $300 profi t, instead of a $550 loss. 
 2.  Check platform every few hours for uncanceled orders. 
 3.  Improve checking of positions. I normally check my positions every few hours, 
but somehow this one slipped by me. 
 4.  Make sure fi lled orders show up on the chart. For some reason, this fi ll did 
not—they usually do. 
 Not a killer loss, but enough for me to getting pretty upset at the situation! 
Percentage‐wise, for this account, the losses were 7 percent, so that is pretty bad. 
Eventually, I want this strategy to get to 10 contracts, and at that point it would be 
some serious money. 
 I noticed the bad trade about 30 hours after I entered it. Then I exited at almost the 
worst time, with a $550 loss. Now, less than one hour later, I could have exited with less 
than a $100 loss. Is it just me, or does this kind of stuff  happen to you, too? If I did not 
know better, I’d swear that someone was controlling prices, and watching my positions, 
and deliberately doing things to maximize my losses! I can defi nitely see why people 
feel this way—at times, it surely feels like the market is out to get me personally! 
 I’ve thought a lot about this occasional paranoia‐type feeling. I know why some of 
this occurs. I tend to discount—not really notice or dwell on—every good thing that
happens to me (mistakes in my favor, excellent news reports right after I enter a po-
sition, etc.). Money‐making anomalies become just a blip in the equity curve. They 
are nice, but I don’t really remember them too well. But I tend to remember losses 
due to mistakes and keep them fi led in my memory bank. Some of these “losing les-
sons” might be good to remember—today’s automated issue is a good example—but 
most should be forgotten just as easily as the money‐making mistakes. That doesn’t 
happen for me, at least not usually. 
 Last year I actually did a study of this psychological phenomenon. I added 
up all my winning mistakes and all my losing mistakes. The net impact, from a 
monetary basis, was just about zero. But from a psychological standpoint, it defi -
nitely was not breakeven. One would think this feeling (“the market is out to get 
\n\n=== PAGE 240 ===\n226
REAL TIME
me”) would have disappeared after 20‐plus years of trading. But it hasn’t, and I 
suspect it never will! 
 By the end of the week, what should have been a decent winning week turned out 
to be a losing week, due to the entry “glitch” described earlier. That cost me $550.
I have taken some immediate steps to prevent it from happening again, and I think I 
am in the clear, at least for the time being. My actual performance now lags the per-
fect strategy performance, and the issue this past week is to blame for that. 
 The problem ultimately comes down to this: if I am depending on a computer 
to place, cancel, and replace orders, unless someone is monitoring it at all times, 
there is always a possibility of something going haywire. The question is how much
of my limited resources (it is just me, after all) do I devote to the eff ort to make the
automation goof‐proof? Doing the usual amount of eff ort hasn’t worked—since I 
just lost $550—but at what point will I be confi dent that those issues will not occur?
Plus, it is usually not the issues you know about, but the issues you don’t know about.
This case was one of them. After thousands of automated trades over the years, this 
particular issue had never come up before! 
 Enough about that issue for now. Performance is still lagging, and the euro day 
system has not had a trade in two weeks (I think I can blame lower volatility for that). 
Regardless, I will “keep on trading!” 
 
■ Week 9—Limit Order Fills (October 28, 2013) 
 One of the tricks unscrupulous system vendors play is to assume that all limit orders 
are fi lled as soon as the price is touched. You can recognize this by looking at a price 
charts of their trades. If the method shows trades being bought at the exact low of 
a bar, and/or sold at the exact high of a bar, you can bet this game is being played.
 Of course, the reality is that it is hard to buy the low and sell the high. My experi-
ence is that, depending on the market and when your order is placed, you can prob-
ably do this 5–20 percent of the time. The other 80–95 percent of the time, price has 
to trade through your price to get you a fi ll at the limit price. 
 This can be an issue with back testing. If your back‐test engine assumes that limit 
orders are fi lled when touched, the results will be too optimistic. If the back‐test 
engine assumes price must be penetrated to get a fi ll, then the back‐test results will
be a bit too pessimistic. I always go with the pessimistic approach. My actual results
can then only be better than the back test. 
 During trading for week 9, the euro day strategy bought the exact low of the bar 
on a limit order. Of course, part of the reason I was fi lled was that I was trading a 1
lot; if I were trading a 10 lot, I probably would have received only a partial fi ll. The
interes ting thing is that when I refreshed the chart, the trade went away, according 
to the strategy engine. Since the price did not go one tick below my limit price, the
\n\n=== PAGE 241 ===\n227
REAL TIME
strategy engine assumes there was no trade. But my real account says there was a 
trade because I was indeed fi lled. Since the trade was a winner, it was a nice surprise
for once! So this is roughly a $400 trade in my real account’s favor, when compared 
to the back‐test engine. This makes up for the order problem that cost me $500 in 
the previous week. 
 
■Week 12 Review
Summary: First, let’s look at the big picture, as I always do. From a look at 
Figure  24.4 , a couple of things are clear: 
 1.  Over the whole course of the system history (walk‐forward, incubation, live), 
the system performance hasn’t changed much. Just as after week 8, I could draw 
a line from the start of walk‐forward to the start of incubation, and then another 
line from the start of incubation until the present time, and the slopes of those
two lines would be about the same—with the slope from start of incubation to 
present being a little fl atter. This gives me some reassurance that the system is 
behaving well on a longer‐term basis.
 2.  It is easy to see that the live trading has been lagging long‐term performance. 
The performance these past three months has been down, and while it has not 
crashed and burned, it certainly has been a disappointment.
 FIGURE 24.4
 Big Picture Equity Curve after 12 Weeks 
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 241 ===\nstrategy engine assumes there was no trade. But my real account says there was a
trade because I was indeed filled. Since the trade was a winner, it was a nice surprise
for once! So this is roughly a $400 trade in my real account’s favor, when compared
to the back-test engine. This makes up for the order problem that cost me $500 in
the previous week.

m Week 12 Review

Summary: First, let’s look at the big picture, as I always do. From a look at
Figure 24.4, a couple of things are clear:

1, Over the whole course of the system history (walk-forward, incubation, live),
the system performance hasn’t changed much. Just as after week 8, I could draw
a line from the start of walk-forward to the start of incubation, and then another
line from the start of incubation until the present time, and the slopes of those
two lines would be about the same—with the slope from start of incubation to
present being a little flatter. This gives me some reassurance that the system is
behaving well on a longer-term basis.

2. It is easy to see that the live trading has been lagging long-term performance. 2

i]

The performance these past three months has been down, and while it has not
crashed and burned, it certainly has been a disappointment.

AWLL Tat

150000 7

pases | = Walkforward os)

= Inevbation

wt

nf

30000 |

20000 }

‘Net Pront

10000 +

Ae

Drawdown
oF + |
o7impi09 011220 100 1 foriat oar sonei2 “Wosis13 1172213 site

10000 +
Date

FIGURE 24.4 Big Picture Equity Curve after 12 Weeks
\n\n=== PAGE 242 ===\n228
REAL TIME
 After 12 weeks of trading this system live, I am down about 10 percent from the 
start for the strategy‐calculated performance, and about 4.5 percent for the actual 
performance (Figure  24.5 ). 
Am I surprised at this result?  Yes. I had expected better, certainly close to
breakeven by now—at the very worst.
Am I disappointed in the results so far? Very much so. The performance these 
past 12 weeks is way behind the long‐term average, so it is very disappointing.
Are results in line with expectations? Just barely. Results are around the 
lower 10 percent line, which means the system in real time is close to being 
a diff erent system than walk‐forward and incubation. Not quite diff erent yet, 
but getting close. 
Are fi lls and trades live comparable to TradeStation strategy report?
No, but it is a good thing! I am doing about $550 better live than the strategy 
predicts because of (1) less slippage than I had planned for and (2) a few trades 
where I was fi lled in real life when price just touched, but did not exceed, my
limit price. 
Do I see any reason to stop trading this system? No. 
Do I see any reason to change my position‐sizing plan, that is, reduce 
or increase my risk? No. 
 After 12 weeks, I will keep on trading per the plan, but this system is just kind 
of fl oundering. A couple of big winners, which is what the system is based on, 
are needed.
 FIGURE 24.5  Daily Performance, After 12 Weeks of Live Trading 
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 242 ===\n228

a
z
2

Euro Day & Night Performance Tracking

‘Average Expected

—Top 10% Expected

$4,000 —Lower 10% Expected
Perfect PiL

ae~ Actual PIL

{ Top 10% Expected

$3,000

$2,000 4------+

Net Profit

$1,000

so

Lower 10% Expected
$1,000 “

$2,000 Day

FIGURE 24.5 Daily Performance, After 12 Weeks of Live Trading

After 12 weeks of trading this
start for the strategy-calculated performance, and about 4.5 percent for the actual

ystem live, I am down about 10 percent from the

performance (Figure 24.5).

Am I surprised at this result? Yes. I had expected better, certainly close to
breakeven by now—at the very worst.

Am I disappointed in the results so far?Very much so. The performance these
past 12 weeks is way behind the long-term average, so it is very disappointing.

Are results in line with expectations? Just barely. Results are around the
lower 10 percent line, which means the system in real time is close to being
a different system than walk-forward and incubation. Not quite different yet,
but getting close.

Are fills and trades live comparable to TradeStation strategy report?
No, but it is a good thing! I am doing about $550 better live than the strategy
predicts because of (1) less slippage than I had planned for and (2) a few trades
where I was filled in real life when price just touched, but did not exceed, my
limit price.

Do I see any reason to stop trading this system? No.

Do I see any reason to change my position-sizing plan, that is, reduce
or increase my risk? No.

After 12 weeks, I will keep on trading per the plan, but this system is just kind
of floundering. A couple of big winners, which is what the system is based on,
are needed.
\n\n=== PAGE 243 ===\n229
REAL TIME
 
■Week 13—Time Limit Review 
 As my strategy continues to fl ounder around breakeven, I start to wonder: how long 
am I willing to put my capital at risk without any return? The answer for me involves
the “next best alternative.” 
 Every six months or so, I look at every system I am trading, and also the systems 
waiting in the wings (ready to be traded live, but currently not trading live). If I fi nd a 
better system than the one I am trading, and I don’t have enough capital to trade both
(or perhaps because of correlation issues I do not want to trade both), I will replace
it. Thus, even if the euro trading strategy is performing decently (making money as
opposed to its current situation of near breakeven), I still might replace it with the
“next best alternative.” 
 I do this exercise only two times a year, in part because it is involved (com-
plicated correlation studies, etc), but mainly because it is only fair to a new 
system going live to have some time to prove itself. Most people don’t have 
the patience to do this, and they jump from system to system, never giving any 
system a fair chance. It would almost like pulling a pitcher in baseball from the 
game as soon as he gives up just one hit. As I showed earlier, even winning systems 
can be losers for quite a while, until the long‐term positive expectancy really 
shows itself. 
 Of course, even with this twice‐a‐year analysis, my original quitting point is still 
in eff ect. If I hit that, I am out, regardless of the next best alternative (which may
be cash). 
 
■Week 15 Review
Summary: After 15 weeks, the euro day and night trading strategies are fi nally 
doing better, as depicted in Figures  24.6 and  24.7 . By looking at the big picture, it 
is clear that the performance of the past few weeks is getting the live results closer 
to the historical back test. The system still has to improve performance, but things
are certainly looking better. After 15 weeks of trading this system live, I am up 
about 1 percent from the start for the strategy‐calculated performance and about 
9.0 percent for the actual performance. 
Am I surprised at this result? Obviously, I was hoping for better, but I am
thankful that the system is showing a profi t at this point.
Are results in line with expectations? Results are defi nitely more in line 
with expectations, especially in the past few weeks. But the strategy as a 
whole is still underperforming. As stated earlier, this approach relies on a 
handful of big profi t trades per year, and so far in live trading there have not 
been any. 
\n\n=== PAGE 244 ===\n230
REAL TIME
 FIGURE 24.6  Big Picture Equity Curve after 12 Weeks
 FIGURE 24.7  Daily Performance after 15 Weeks of Live Trading 
Are fi lls and trades live comparable to TradeStation strat-
egy report? No, and that is still good! I am doing about $700
better live than the strategy predicts because of (1) less slippage
than planned and (2) multiple trades where I was fi lled in real life 
but not in the back‐test engine (limit price penetration issues). 
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 244 ===\n150000 7 py
| RealMoney

— f
—Waktonward te
40000 Jo incubation a an

E sow | an
i | dl

ae ses
, |

10000 +

FIGURE 24.6 Big Picture Equity Curve after 12 Weeks

Are fills and trades live comparable to TradeStation strat-
egy report? No, and that is still good! I am doing about $700

S
Ss

better live than the strategy predicts because of (1) less slippage
than planned and (2) multiple trades where I was filled in real life

REALTIME |

but not in the back-test engine (limit price penetration issues).

Euro Day & Night Performance Tracking

#5.000 : F :
— erage Expected i a
Top 10% Expected ate
24.000 |.|  —Lower 10% Expected
Perfect PIL
a Actual PL :
+#3,000 “average Expected =~

$2,000 }-~

Net Profit,

Lower 10% Expected

FIGURE 24.7 Daily Performance after 15 Weeks of Live Trading
\n\n=== PAGE 245 ===\n231
REAL TIME
Do I see any reason to stop trading this system? No. 
Do I see any reason to change my position‐sizing plan, that is, reduce 
or increase my risk? No. 
 After 15 weeks, I will keep on trading per the plan, but this system is still under-
performing, compared to original expectations.  That is one drawback to a trading 
approach that requires large, but infrequent, winning trades.  It might be a long time 
before this system really shows its capability. 
 
■Future Reviews 
 This running diary will continue indefi nitely, or until I stop trading the euro day 
and night system, at which point I’ll explain any reasons I had to stop live trading.
Updates can be found at the web site (www.wiley.com/go/algotradingsystems).
\n\n=== PAGE 246 ===\n\n\n=== PAGE 247 ===\n Cautionary Tales
 PA R T  V I I 
\n\n=== OCR PAGE 247 ===\npra

CAUTIONARY [ALES
\n\n=== PAGE 248 ===\n\n\n=== PAGE 249 ===\n235
 W
inning the World Cup Championship of Futures Trading has made me a 
(very) minor celebrity in the small world of trading, and that is pretty neat. 
Both struggling and accomplished traders have gotten in touch with me because of 
my success, and some great relationships and trading discussions have resulted. I’ve 
probably never had a better time talking trading than I did a few years ago in Chicago, 
as I spent the day with four other World Cup Championship of Futures Trading 
winners. If only I had a tape recorder for those conversations and discussions—pure 
gold! Being a top contest performer for three consecutive years opened quite a few 
doors for me. All things considered, participating in the trading contest has been a 
very fun ride. 
 Of course, there is a downside to all the notoriety, too. Trading seems to attract 
people with what I’d describe as “defective” personalities: these folks possess some 
personality fl aw, something they cannot see (but everyone else can), something that 
probably impacts their trading. Believe it or not, seeing fl aws in other traders can be 
a big help to improving your trading. So I’d like to present some of the most outra-
geous characters I’ve come across while trading, many of whom I’ve met because of 
my notoriety. Many of these people I like and have sympathy for, so I have changed 
names and certain facts so as to not upset any fragile psyches. Or, as they say in movie 
disclaimers, “names have been changed to protect the innocent. Any resemblance to 
any person, living or dead, is purely coincidental.” 
 Delusions of 
Grandeur 
 C H A P T E R   2 5  
\n\n=== PAGE 250 ===\n236
DELUSIONS OF GRANDEUR
 
■ Don Demo 
 I’ve known Don for quite a few years, and he is always telling me about his paper 
money demo account successes. His discretionary trading performance in demo
mode is actually quite spectacular; he can rake in probably $1,500 per day trading
two mini S&P contracts. Plus, he is consistently profi table, and makes simulator 
money 9 days out of 10. He’ll crow all day and all night about his trading prowess,
except when I mention real‐money trading to him. Then, he grows silent, and after
some prodding, Don will admit that his last foray into real‐money trading ended in 
disaster. I’ve counted at least fi ve of these disasters over the years, and each one was 
followed by even better demo account success. Don considers himself an excellent
trader who just suff ers unspeakable bad luck in real‐money trading.
Don’s Lesson: Demo trading is not the same as real‐money trading. Winning 
at simulated trading, with a discretionary approach, has practically zero correlation 
with real‐money trading. Don’t assume demo success will lead to real‐money suc-
cess, because it probably won’t. 
 
■ Gus the Guru
 I’ve never met Gus. I’ve never spoken with Gus. I’ve never e‐mailed Gus. But I know 
a ton about him from struggling traders who’ve contacted me. According to these 
people, he is a guru’s guru. Gus times the market in exquisite fashion. He takes indi-
cators, trend lines, Fibonacci numbers, and any other technical tool and paints an al-
most mystical story of market action. He easily explains why prices do what they do 
(note the past tense here). When I fi rst heard about Gus, I thought, “He must be rich 
from trading, since everyone says he is top notch at analyzing the markets.”  Well, not 
quite. It turns out that right now Gus isn’t trading at all. It seems his last account ran
down to zero. Broker malfeasance, he claims, but it is not the fi rst time he has had no 
money to trade with. Either he must run across a lot of crooked brokers or the story
is more involved. In any event, now he sells his advice on the Internet. His pupils,
enamored with their guru, got very confrontational with me when I suggested that
maybe Gus wasn’t such a great trader. More than just on the hook, Gus has these fi sh 
on ice, in the cooler, on the boat, fi lleted, and ready to toss on the grill.
Gus’s Lesson: Beware of gurus who don’t trade. The reason most don’t is that 
they can’t. 
 
■ Paul the Predictor 
 If I gave out “outrageousness” awards for people in this chapter, Paul would take fi rst 
prize. Over the past six years, I probably received 1,000 e‐mails from Paul, as many 
as 20 in one day. Paul is convinced he has some innate ability to predict the direction
\n\n=== PAGE 251 ===\n237
DELUSIONS OF GRANDEUR
of the market—any market. And he had no qualms about telling me about his great-
ness, over and over and over again. His super ability was detailed in many e‐mails,
when he wasn’t trying to partner with me, trying to borrow money from me, or 
trying to get me to pay him for his trading “advice.” Paul was amazed that Goldman 
Sachs wasn’t pulling out all stops to hire him (even though he never applied for a 
job there, and had no real‐money trading experience), and he really got upset when 
popular trading forums banned him because of boastful posting. For the forums that 
did not ban him, Paul left on his own accord after realizing members were apparently 
too dimwitted to appreciate his alleged greatness. As far as I can tell, he may have at
one time traded a $5,000 account, but it did not last too long. I haven’t heard from
him in a while, but my guess is he is a snake oil vendor in the making.
Paul’s Lesson: No one can predict the market. Beware of those who claim such 
abilities. 
 
■ Cal the Complication King
 If I ask you what two plus two is, you’d quickly and correctly answer four. But if 
you ask Cal the Complication King the same question, he’ll give an answer like this: 
“Two is the base of all exponential derivations, and when one puts it upon itself 
in the Euclidean number space—disregarding irrationality eff ects, of course—the
parameter space will increase by the same amount.” Huh? If you are like me, this
guy makes no sense at all. Amazingly, though, answers like this have earned Cal a
cultlike following on one or two popular Internet trading forums. He pops up in all 
sorts of trading topic threads, spews his unintelligible nonsense, and then leaves his
sycophants to interpret and defend his “answers.” I’ve never been able to fi gure out if 
this nut actually trades, but if he does, I’m sure it is unprofi table—and complicated. 
Cal’s Lesson: KISS—Keep It Simple, Stupid. Simple concepts sometimes work 
best in trading. Just because someone talks in riddles doesn’t mean he or she knows
more than you. In fact, many times it means they know less than you! 
 
■ Pay Me Peter
 I always like talking to system vendors, to see what they have and what they know. 
Occasionally, I’ll fi nd some actual value behind the person. Typically, though, there
is nothing behind the curtain with these people. Just smoke and mirrors, and double 
talk. So it was with Pay Me Peter. He was off ering a system for sale, so I asked for
details. He was selling his system for $2,500 outright, or $500 up front and $100 a 
month. With those high prices, I assumed it had to be “Holy Grail” good. So I asked
for the performance report. I can usually smell the fake reports a mile away, and that
is what I suspected to receive: $100,000 profi t per year, no drawdown, 90 percent 
\n\n=== PAGE 252 ===\n238
DELUSIONS OF GRANDEUR
winning trades—in other words, typical ridiculous results. What he sent me was a
shocker: a fi ve‐day back test that showed $290 net profi t! This seemed crazy, so I 
asked for a longer back test. Peter then replied that if I wanted to ask more ques-
tions, his rate was $100 per half hour, and if I sent money via PayPal he would gladly 
answer my questions. Who in their right mind thinks this way?
Peter’s Lesson: An infl ated sense of worth almost always spells doom in trading. 
The best traders I know are the humblest ones.
 
■ Frank Five Hundred 
 Frank e‐mailed me a few years ago and explained he was new to trading. He 
wanted a forex robot that worked, and had only $500 to trade with. “What do you 
recommend?” he asked. I replied as I do to all new traders with limited cash. “Your 
best bet is to study all you can, and do whatever you have to in order to get $10,000 
or more to start trading. Anything less than this, and chances are you’ll lose it all.
Take your time; the market will always be there.” Sage advice, if I do say so myself. I 
wish someone had given me that advice way back when. Frank, though, did not see 
it that way. He proceeded to swear up a blue storm at me, calling me every name in 
the book, claiming that I was trying to keep him from making money, and that he’d 
bankrupt me through his soon‐to‐be large‐scale trades. He was probably the angriest 
wannabe trader person I have ever come across. After burning all bridges with me, 
he just ended up buying a robot from some Internet site. I found this out a few years 
later, when he admitted that he lost his $500 and a bunch more afterward. 
Frank’s Lesson: If someone gives you general trading advice (not stock tips), 
and it does not involve buying something from them, listen to them. They are trying 
to help you. Also, don’t start trading with only $500.
 
■ Billy the Boaster 
 Where do I start with Billy the Boaster? He probably has every conceivable men-
tal disorder around. Paranoia?  Yes, he believes government agents follow him con-
stantly, trying to steal his trading secrets. Egomania?  Yes, he constantly tells me how 
brilliant he is, how he won a scholarship in high school for being a math whiz, how 
he was accepted to both (two!) colleges he applied to, and so on. Addictive person-
ality?  Yes, a doobie‐smoking fi end, his pro‐marijuana videos were well received by 
potheads on YouTube, although not by potential investors. Delusional?  Yes, he told
me he did not want to enter a real‐money trading contest because his strategies
would turn $15,000 into over a billion dollars within a year, so “what’s the point of 
entering?” Oddly enough, he could be a decent trader once he cures himself of these
issues. He’d rather live in a fantasy world, I guess.
\n\n=== PAGE 253 ===\n239
DELUSIONS OF GRANDEUR
Billy’s Lesson: Live in reality. You are just another trader struggling to succeed.
Accept the truth, embrace your lot in life, and then success may just come your way. 
 
■ Connie the Compounder 
 Seven or eight years ago, I fi rst ran into Connie over at Collective2.com, which, like 
any other trading site, has its share of delusional folk hiding among good traders. 
Connie’s big thing was compounding. She’d go on and on about compounding, and 
how great compounding was with her trading systems. The problem was that her 
depth of knowledge ended at compounding. She knew nothing about investing or 
trading, besides knowing she wanted to pursue that as a career. So Connie did what 
most unethical system vendors do: she posted hypothetical results that showed enor-
mous growth due to compounding. She claimed she did the same thing with her own
money. Wrong! Unfortunately for her, she was exposed as a fraud when someone
found an IRS tax court case against her, where the judge decreed that to write off  
trading business expenses you actually have to do some trading (go fi gure!). 
Connie’s Lesson: Compounding is a great thing, but it is not the only thing.
Learn about all aspects of trading before trying it yourself. 
 
■ Ian versus the Illuminati
 The so‐called Illuminati (or some other such group) are out to get Ian, who runs 
a small trading web site. Apparently, Ian fi gured out that these people have rigged 
all trading in the world, and he knows all their secrets. Of course, he’ll share these 
secrets with you for only a few hundred dollars. Instead of getting rich by trading his 
so‐called secret code, Ian prefers to harass and be harassed by all manner of online
people, starting fi ghts in every trading forum, and being banned from major sites
like Facebook, Twitter, and StockTwits. I picture Ian sitting in his grungy little apart-
ment, wearing a tin foil hat to block radio signals from the Illuminati. Even though I
believe he peddles garbage, I really feel sorry for Ian, as I think he is truly mentally
ill and desperately needs professional help. 
Ian’s Lesson: Stay far away from vendors who want to fi ght with you. They prob-
ably have many issues going on, and chances are their product is worthless anyhow.
 
■ Suki the Spinner
 I met Suki on the TradeStation support forum. He was off ering a strategy switch—
his great strategy for one of my strategies. Unfortunately, I could never give him a
walk‐forward strategy (that actually worked well with real‐money trading, by the 
\n\n=== PAGE 254 ===\n240
DELUSIONS OF GRANDEUR
way) that was anywhere close to his. I felt defl ated—how could I not develop a 
strategy as good as Suki’s? Suki repeatedly berated me and my trading skills. He won-
dered, “How can you, Kevin, have such poor strategies, while I, Suki the great, have
such fabulous ones? Perhaps you need a diff erent career.”  Well, a few months passed,
and then Suki let slip that all his strategies were back tested up to the present day. No
walk‐forward, no out‐of‐sample, no real‐money results. Naturally, he was a simula-
tion millionaire, and even shared screenshots attesting to his simulator balance. No
wonder I could not match him—everything was a play‐money game to him.
Suki’s Lesson: Beware of back tests. Unless you developed them or fully 
trust the developer, assume the back test is a steaming pile of . . . garbage. Treat it 
appropriately. 
 
■ Paolo the Plagiarizer 
 Some mental miscreants don’t actually trade but just provide advice. Paolo was such 
a character. A respected journalist for a forex trading web site, Paolo attracted a lot 
of views and comments to his articles. He seemed very knowledgeable, and I’m sure 
he earned a good living dispensing trading advice. The only problem was that most
of his writing was someone else’s. He plagiarized at least a half‐dozen trading writ-
ers, including myself. This wasn’t an “oh, I forgot to include quotation marks”–type 
off ense; it was plain out copy and paste of another’s work, passing it off  as his own. 
What is even worse is that he told me it was perfectly acceptable, since most of the
articles he stole were free anyhow. He had a big mental block that stealing is wrong. 
Paolo’s Lesson: Before you become enamored with a trading expert, make sure 
he or she is the real deal fi rst. Scam artists come in all shapes and sizes. 
 
■ Slick Sam 
 Slick Sam is a combination of every slimy system vendor and trading room operator 
out there. Sam will lure you in with a free pass to his trading room or a compli-
mentary webinar. Then, he’ll slowly tighten the noose, getting you to buy expensive 
“educational” materials. You’ll hear about his trades, but you’ll never see him take
any trades live. Even if you are watching him live, he’ll be fl at in an uptrend and then 
suddenly announce, “I just got out of my long position for a profi t.” Or he’ll claim 
that he can’t show you his trades, but you should still believe his fantastic results.
Once in a while, Sam will mess up, and you’ll see his trading platform says “demo.” 
Of course, whoever exposes that fact will quickly be banned from the room.
Sam’s Lesson: Assume that each vendor you encounter is selling his secrets be-
cause he needs money, not because he is a do‐gooder philanthropist, dedicated to 
helping newbie traders. This doesn’t mean he isn’t legitimate, but if you realize his
\n\n=== PAGE 255 ===\n241
DELUSIONS OF GRANDEUR
true motivation (transferring your money from you to him), you’ll at least enter any 
transaction with your eyes wide open. In 20 years of trading, I’ve probably purchased 
less than 10 systems, courses, consultations, and so on. I am very picky, and I’ve
never been blatantly ripped off . I’m proud of that fact.
 
■ The Delusion Conclusion 
 No one is perfect, but many times even the slightest personality issue can stop your 
trading success dead in its tracks. The best advice I can give is to look at yourself in 
the mirror and be totally honest about your trading. Chances are that you are not the
greatest trader ever, you probably cannot predict the market days in advance, you 
probably have not made millions of dollars trading and secret agents are not trying to 
steal your trading strategies. If you think you are invincible, real‐money trading will 
certainly put an end to that thought. Trading is extremely tough, and you must be 
mentally sharp to compete. If your nonperfect personality gets in the way, the best 
thing to do is to get professional help, or just stay away from trading.
\n\n=== PAGE 256 ===\n\n\n=== PAGE 257 ===\n243
 C O N C L U S I O N  
 W
e’ve now reached the end of my trading journey. Twenty‐some odd years in 
the making, you’ve seen some extreme downs, some extreme highs, and a 
lot of time spent in between both fl oundering around. First and foremost, I hope this 
book serves as a warning to all the new traders out there. Learn from my experience: 
 
■ Trading is tough. Exceedingly tough. Part‐time folks trading from their home are 
up against professionals. The professionals are really great at taking your money.
 
■ There is no “Holy Grail” out there—no magic trading strategy that you can buy for 
$100, $1,000, or even $10,000. There are decent ones for sale, but none is perfect. 
 
■ Where there is potential reward, there is potential risk. The results equity curve 
might only show the reward side of the equation, but remember that risk is always 
there—it just may be hidden. 
 
■ The best road to profi ts is to fi nd your own trading strategy, one that meets all 
your goals and objectives. Just don’t expect the process to be easy. 
 I learned all of these lessons, and many more, before I really understood how to 
trade. Even today, I still struggle. No trading strategy lasts forever, and I fi nd myself 
constantly reinventing my trading, and creating new strategies, in an attempt to stay 
ahead of the pack. If I relax for a while, I inevitably fi nd my performance suff ers.
 The majority of this book has focused on developing trading strategies. While I 
certainly value the contribution of trading psychology and position sizing and money 
\n\n=== PAGE 258 ===\n244
CONCLUSION
management, I view them as icing on the cake, with the trading strategy as the cake. 
I look at trading this way for two reasons:
 
■ All the positive trading psychology in the world will not make you profi table if your 
strategy is a loser. Positive thinking, detailed journaling, breathing exercises to calm 
your mind, and all other mental‐type activities are great, but they still do not take 
the place of a solid strategy. Many people, and many trading psychology coaches out 
there, seem to think that having the proper mind‐set ensures profi ts. It is just not true. 
 
■ Proper position sizing and money management are important if you have a win-
ning strategy, but conversely if you have a losing strategy, no position sizing or 
money management method will ever make you profi table. It might help you
burn through your account more slowly, but a losing strategy is a losing strategy, 
no matter how you dress it up. Just think of trading like casino gambling—the
house wins because it has an edge, and gamblers lose because they don’t have an
edge. Changing bet sizes doesn’t alter the irrefutable fact: without an edge, even-
tually you will lose. 
 For long‐term success, you really need to fi nd a winning strategy. This entails 
a lot of “grunt” work—fi nding ideas, testing them, refi ning them, and hopefully 
eventually trading them. A few years ago, I kept track of my trading strategy de-
velopment. I found out that I had to test about 100 to 200 trading ideas before I 
found something worth trading with my own money. Most people would likely 
abandon trading long before testing 100 ideas. Others would say, “Yes, it takes 
Kevin 100 ideas, but he is a dullard. I am much smarter, so it will only take me less 
than 10 ideas.” Those same people, unfortunately, usually take shortcuts or cheat 
to get what appears to be an acceptable trading system. Shortcut takers, in the 
long run, usually lose. 
 In the last sections of this book, I put everything together, and walked you 
through the development of two trading strategies for the euro currency futures. 
As of this writing, I am trading these with my own money, but I keep a close 
eye on their performance. In the long term, they hopefully will succeed, and 
as they do, I’ll increase my position size accordingly. If they do not succeed, 
then I’ll eventually swap them out with other strategies. Although I hope that 
every strategy I create does well, I also know that is not always the case. Surely, 
the performance of these two euro strategies so far bears that out. They are 
currently making money but underperforming, and maybe they will continue to 
do so, or maybe they will return to their long‐term averages. One never knows, 
so I usually prepare for the worst, and hope for the best. Many times, the end 
result is somewhere in between.
 In closing, I’ll leave you with one thought: if you put your mind to becoming a 
good trader and follow that up with proper eff ort, you can be successful. I am liv-
\n\n=== PAGE 259 ===\n245
CONCLUSION
ing proof of that, although hopefully your journey will not take as long as mine did. 
But, to succeed long term, plan on dedicating a lot of time, eff ort, and money to the
cause. Trading is like anything else good in life; if it is good, it is worth working for.
Don’t be tempted by those off ering shortcuts, easy fi xes, magic formulas, or Holy
Grail systems. Those folks will only sidetrack and derail your eff ort. Put the time in, 
follow an approach that other successful traders use, and you’ll be much better off .
I wished I had taken that approach back in the late 1980s, when I fi rst learned about 
futures trading from the Cowboy Trader. 
 Good luck, and happy trading!
\n\n=== PAGE 260 ===\n\n\n=== PAGE 261 ===\n247
 
■Strategy 1: Baseline Strategy (No Randomness)   
 input: nContracts(1);
 var:ssl1(1);
 var:ssl(2000); 
    if date >= 1070316 and date < 1080314 then 
    begin
        ssl1 = 0.75 ;
    end ;
    if date >= 1080314 and date < 1090311 then 
    begin
        ssl1 = 0.75 ;
    end ;
    if date >= 1090311 and date < 1100310 then 
    begin
        ssl1 = 0.75 ;
    end ;
    if date >= 1100310 and date < 1110309 then 
 Monkey Trading
Example, 
TradeStation Easy
Language Code 
 A P P E N D I X  A   
\n\n=== PAGE 262 ===\n248
MONKEY  TRADING EXAMPLE, TRADESTATION EASY LANGUAGE CODE
    begin
        ssl1 = 0.5 ; 
    end ;
    if date >= 1110309 and date < 1120310 then 
   begin
        ssl1 = 0.5 ; 
    end ;
    if date >= 1120310 and date < 1130308 then 
   begin
        ssl1 = 1.25 ;
    end ;
    if date >= 1130308 and date < 1140308 then 
   begin
        ssl1 = .75 ; 
    end ;
 
 if date >= 1070316 then begin 
 if close<close[1] and close[1]<close[2]  then begin
 buy ncontracts Contracts next bar at market; 
 End; 
 if close>close[1] and close[1]>close[2]  then begin
 SellShort ncontracts Contracts  next bar at market;
 End; 
 SetStopContract; 
 setstoploss(minlist(ssl1*BigPointValue*avgtruerange(14),ssl));
 end; 
\n\n=== PAGE 263 ===\n249
MONKEY  TRADING EXAMPLE, TRADESTATION EASY LANGUAGE CODE
 
■ Strategy 2: Random Entry, Baseline Exit Strategy
 input:
iter(1),percentlong(.400),holdbars(2.5),exitclose(0),oddstradetoday(.47),be
gindate(1070319); 
 var:posstradetoday(0);
 //entry is random 
 input: nContracts(1);
 var:ssl1(1);
 var:ssl(2000); 
    if date >= 1070316 and date < 1080314 then 
    begin
        ssl1 = 0.75 ;
    end ;
    if date >= 1080314 and date < 1090311 then 
    begin
        ssl1 = 0.75 ;
    end ;
    if date >= 1090311 and date < 1100310 then 
    begin
        ssl1 = 0.75 ;
    end ;
    if date >= 1100310 and date < 1110309 then 
    begin
        ssl1 = 0.5 ; 
    end ;
    if date >= 1110309 and date < 1120310 then 
    begin
        ssl1 = 0.5 ; 
    end ;
    if date >= 1120310 and date < 1130308 then 
   begin
        ssl1 = 1.25 ;
    end ;
    if date >= 1130308 and date < 1130501 then 
   begin
        ssl1 = .75 ; 
    end ;
\n\n=== PAGE 264 ===\n250
MONKEY  TRADING EXAMPLE, TRADESTATION EASY LANGUAGE CODE
 
 if date >= 1070316 then begin 
 if close<close[1] and close[1]<close[2]  then begin
 sell ncontracts Contracts next bar at market; 
 End; 
 if close>close[1] and close[1]>close[2]  then begin
 buytocover ncontracts Contracts  next bar at market;
 End; 
 SetStopContract; 
 setstoploss(minlist(ssl1*BigPointValue*avgtruerange(14),ssl));
 end; 
 posstradetoday=random(1); //random number for today’s trade 
 If  date>begindate then begin 
 If posstradetoday<=oddstradetoday then begin //trade will occur today 
    //enter trade 
    If random(1)<percentlong then buy this bar at close 
     Else sellshort this bar at close;
   end; 
 end; 
\n\n=== PAGE 265 ===\n251
MONKEY  TRADING EXAMPLE, TRADESTATION EASY LANGUAGE CODE
 
■ Strategy 3: Baseline Entry, Random Exit Strategy
 input:
iter(1),percentlong(.400),holdbars(2.5),exitclose(0),oddstradetoday(.47),be
gindate(1070319); 
 var:posstradetoday(0);
 //exit is random 
 input: nContracts(1);
 var:ssl1(1);
 var:ssl(2000); 
    if date >= 1070316 and date < 1080314 then 
    begin
        ssl1 = 0.75 ;
    end ;
    if date >= 1080314 and date < 1090311 then 
    begin
        ssl1 = 0.75 ;
    end ;
    if date >= 1090311 and date < 1100310 then 
    begin
        ssl1 = 0.75 ;
    end ;
    if date >= 1100310 and date < 1110309 then 
    begin
        ssl1 = 0.5 ; 
    end ;
    if date >= 1110309 and date < 1120310 then 
    begin
        ssl1 = 0.5 ; 
    end ;
    if date >= 1120310 and date < 1130308 then 
   begin
        ssl1 = 1.25 ;
    end ;
    if date >= 1130308 and date < 1140308 then 
   begin
        ssl1 = .75 ; 
    end ;
\n\n=== PAGE 266 ===\n252
MONKEY  TRADING EXAMPLE, TRADESTATION EASY LANGUAGE CODE
 
   if date >= 1070316 then begin 
 if close<close[1] and close[1]<close[2] and marketposition=0  then begin 
 buy ncontracts Contracts next bar at market; 
 End; 
 if close>close[1] and close[1]>close[2] and marketposition=0   then begin 
 SellShort ncontracts Contracts  next bar at market;
 End; 
 end; 
 posstradetoday=random(1); //random number for today’s trade 
 If barssinceentry>=random(2*holdbars) then begin
   Sell this bar at close;
   Buytocover this bar at close; 
 end; 
   If exitclose=1 then setexitonclose;
 
■ Strategy 4: Random Entry, Random Exit Strategy
 input:
iter(1),percentlong(.400),holdbars(2.5),exitclose(0),oddstradetoday(.48),be
gindate(1070319); 
 var:posstradetoday(0);
   posstradetoday=random(1); //random number for today’s trade 
\n\n=== PAGE 267 ===\n253
MONKEY  TRADING EXAMPLE, TRADESTATION EASY LANGUAGE CODE
   If  date>begindate then begin 
   If posstradetoday<=oddstradetoday then begin //trade will occur today 
    //enter trade 
    If random(1)<percentlong then buy this bar at close 
     Else sellshort this bar at close;
   end; 
 end; 
 If barssinceentry>=random(2*holdbars) then begin
  Sell this bar at close;
   Buytocover this bar at close; 
 end; 
   If exitclose=1 then setexitonclose; 
\n\n=== PAGE 268 ===\n\n\n=== PAGE 269 ===\n255
 vars: FirstTime (1800),
      LastTime (2359),
      ATRmult (3), 
      TRmult (.5), 
      Nb (10), 
      NATR (60), 
      Stoplo(275); 
      FirstTime = 1800 ;
      LastTime = 2359 ;
  if date >= 1090721 and date < 1100104 then 
  begin 
      Nb = 9 ; 
      NATR = 93 ; 
      ATRmult = 3.15 ;
      TRmult = 0.51 ;
      Stoplo= 425 ; 
  end ; 
  if date >= 1100104 and date < 1100617 then 
  begin 
      Nb = 9 ; 
 Euro Night Strategy,
TradeStation Easy
g
g
g
Language Format
 A P P E N D I X  B   
\n\n=== PAGE 270 ===\n256
EURO NIGHT STRATEGY, TRADESTATION EASY LANGUAGE FORMAT
      NATR = 93 ; 
      ATRmult = 2.55 ;
      TRmult = 0.66 ;
      Stoplo= 375 ; 
  end ;
  if date >= 1100617 and date < 1101129 then 
  begin
      Nb = 14 ; 
      NATR = 83 ; 
      ATRmult = 2.75 ;
      TRmult = 0.71 ;
      Stoplo= 425 ; 
  end ;
  if date >= 1101129 and date < 1110515 then 
  begin
      Nb = 14 ; 
      NATR = 83 ; 
      ATRmult = 2.75 ;
      TRmult = 0.66 ;
      Stoplo= 425 ; 
  end ;
  if date >= 1110515 and date < 1111026 then 
  begin
      Nb = 19 ; 
      NATR = 93 ; 
      ATRmult = 3.15 ;
      TRmult = 0.56 ;
      Stoplo= 425 ; 
  end ;
  if date >= 1111026 and date < 1120412 then 
  begin
      Nb = 14 ; 
      NATR = 83 ; 
      ATRmult = 2.95 ;
      TRmult = 0.61 ;
      Stoplo= 425 ; 
  end ;
  if date >= 1120412 and date < 1120924 then 
  begin
      Nb = 14 ; 
      NATR = 93 ; 
      ATRmult = 2.95 ;
      TRmult = 0.61 ;
      Stoplo= 425 ; 
  end ;
\n\n=== PAGE 271 ===\n257
EURO NIGHT STRATEGY, TRADESTATION EASY LANGUAGE FORMAT
  if date >= 1120924 and date < 1130310 then 
  begin
      Nb = 19 ; 
      NATR = 73 ; 
      ATRmult = 3.15 ;
      TRmult = 0.71 ;
      Stoplo= 425 ; 
  end ;
  if date >= 1130310 and date < 1130826 then 
  begin
      Nb = 14 ; 
      NATR = 93 ; 
      ATRmult = 2.95 ;
      TRmult = 0.51 ;
      Stoplo= 425 ; 
  end ;
  if date >= 1130826 and date < 1140101 then 
  begin
      Nb = 14 ; 
      NATR = 93 ; 
      ATRmult = 2.55 ;
      TRmult = 0.71 ;
      Stoplo= 425 ; 
  end ;
 Var:   LongPrice(0), ShortPrice(0), LongTarget(0), ShortTarget(0);
 //limit entry prices 
 ShortPrice = Average(Low, Nb) + ATRmult * AvgTrueRange(NATR);
 LongPrice = Average(High, Nb) - ATRmult * AvgTrueRange(NATR);
 {code to ensure only 1 order is entered at each bar - order closest to 
price} 
 var:diff1(0),diff2(0),EntrytoPick(0);
 EntrytoPick=0; 
 diff1=absvalue(close-LongPrice); 
 diff2=absvalue(close-ShortPrice); 
 If diff1<=diff2 then EntryToPick=1; 
 If diff1>diff2 then EntryToPick=2;
 if date >= 1090721 and MarketPosition = 0 and EntriesToday(Date) < 1  and 
Time >= FirstTime and Time < LastTime then begin
\n\n=== PAGE 272 ===\n258
EURO NIGHT STRATEGY, TRADESTATION EASY LANGUAGE FORMAT
 If  EntryToPick=1 then begin 
  Buy(“Long Entry”) next bar at LongPrice limit;
 end; 
 If  EntryToPick=2 then begin 
 Sell short(“Short Entry”) next bar at ShortPrice limit; 
 end; 
 end; 
 If MarketPosition=-1 then begin 
  ShortTarget = EntryPrice - TRmult * TrueRange;
  Buy to cover(“Short Exit”) next bar at ShortTarget limit; 
 end; 
 If MarketPosition =1 then begin 
  LongTarget = EntryPrice + TRmult * TrueRange; 
  Sell(“Long Exit”) next bar at LongTarget limit;
 end; 
 Setstopposition; 
 setstoploss(stoplo); 
 SetExitOnClose; 
\n\n=== PAGE 273 ===\n259
 var:xb(2),xb2(50),pipadd(1),Stopl(400),proft(5000);
  if date >= 1091118 and date < 1101025 then 
  begin 
      xb = 4 ; 
      xb2 = 70 ; 
      pipadd = 2 ; 
      Stopl = 275 ; 
  end ; 
  if date >= 1101025 and date < 1110929 then 
  begin 
      xb = 4 ; 
      xb2 = 72 ; 
      pipadd = 5 ; 
      Stopl = 225 ; 
  end ; 
  if date >= 1110929 and date < 1120904 then 
  begin 
      xb = 3 ; 
      xb2 = 74 ; 
      pipadd = 8 ; 
      Stopl = 425 ; 
 Euro Day Strategy,
TradeStation Easy
y
gy
y
Language Format
 A P P E N D I X  C   
\n\n=== PAGE 274 ===\n260
EURO DAY STRATEGY, TRADESTATION EASY LANGUAGE FORMAT
  end ;
  if date >= 1120904 and date < 1130812 then 
  begin
      xb = 3 ; 
      xb2 = 74 ; 
      pipadd = 11 ; 
      Stopl = 425 ; 
  end ;
 if date >= 1130812 and date < 11400101 then 
  begin
      xb = 5 ; 
      xb2 = 80 ; 
      pipadd = 8 ; 
      Stopl = 425 ; 
  end ;
 var:cs(0),tradestoday(0),startprof(0),starttrades(0),stoplo(0);
 cs=currentsession(0);
 If cs<>cs[1] then begin
  tradestoday=0; 
  startprof=NetProfit + OpenPositionProfit; 
  starttrades=TotalTrades;
  Stoplo=stopl; 
 end; 
 If totaltrades<>starttrades or marketposition<>0 or startprof<>NetProfit + 
OpenPositionProfit then tradestoday=1;
 If tradestoday=0 and time<1500 and date >= 1091118 then begin 
 //entry rules
 If (high>=highest(high,xb) and close<close[xb2] )   then begin
  sellshort next bar at high+pipadd/10000 limit;
 end; 
 If low<=lowest(low,xb) and close>close[xb2]    then begin 
  buy next bar at low-pipadd/10000 limit; 
 end; 
\n\n=== PAGE 275 ===\n261
EURO DAY STRATEGY, TRADESTATION EASY LANGUAGE FORMAT
 end; 
 //exit rules
 Setstopposition; 
 setstoploss(stoplo); 
 setprofittarget(proft);
 setexitonclose; 
\n\n=== PAGE 276 ===\n\n\n=== PAGE 277 ===\n263
 A B O U T  T H E  C O M PA N I O N  W E B  S I T E 
B
uilding Winning Algorithmic Trading Systems comes with a companion web site at 
www.wiley.com/go/algotradingsystems (password: davey14). 
 You will fi nd fi ve supplementary spreadsheets and other information to help you 
on your trading journey: 
 
■ Daily Tracking Worksheet 
■ Development Worksheet
 
■ Equity and Drawdown Curve Builder
■ Monte Carlo Simulator
 
■ Monthly Summary Sheets 
 In addition, readers will fi nd quarterly performance updates for the strategies 
described in this book. (For more frequent performance updates, go to www
.kjtradingsystems.com/bookupdates.html.)
 For updates and additional resources, go to www.WileyTrading.com. Click on 
“Free Trader Resources” and register to get access. 
\n\n=== PAGE 278 ===\n\n\n=== PAGE 279 ===\n265
I N D E X
A
actual performance, 25, 49, 216–17, 221, 226,
228–29
annual rate of return/drawdown, 65, 
165–66, 168
annual return, 17, 23, 31, 62–63, 65, 82,
155–56, 165–66, 168, 182–83, 185
B
back-test engine, 92, 100, 216, 226–27, 230
baseline strategy, 112–14
breakeven stops, 86, 88
brokers, 13, 20, 38, 46, 65, 99–100, 180,
195–97, 200
BS scale, 45–47
C
capital, 17, 25, 34–35, 63–64, 66, 133–34, 
179–80, 196, 229
Carlo, Monte, 61–63, 69, 72, 129–30,
136, 149, 151, 165, 167, 169, 171–73, 
182, 216
commissions, 14, 44, 53–56, 69, 94, 105, 
108–9, 118, 123, 157, 198–201, 216–17
Commodity Trading Advisor. See CTA
continuous contracts, 96–98, 118, 198–99
back-adjusted, 98, 198–99
contract
data, 96
prices, 97
contracts, 10, 17–19, 25, 27–28, 53, 55–56, 
63–65, 69, 96, 141–43, 172, 178, 
180–82, 184–85, 198
data, 96
month, 96, 198
multiple, 64, 96, 178, 180
second, 17, 181, 183
single, 142–43, 180
Cook, Michael, 28–29
correlation, 25, 135, 144, 171–72
serial, 62
CTA (Commodity Trading Advisor), 45–46,
73, 173
curve
closed trade equity, 57
linear equity, 123, 136
strategy equity, 61, 136
D
Daily Performance Review, 212–13
Detailed Analysis, 61–69
developing trading strategies, 43, 45, 47, 72, 243
\n\n=== PAGE 280 ===\n266
INDEX
discretionary trading, 46, 82, 86, 132, 
187, 236
diversifi cation, 72, 87, 133–37, 149, 
152, 169
drawdown, 26–27, 57–58, 61–63, 66–68, 123,
133, 136, 140–41, 144–45, 169, 172, 
178, 189, 206–8, 222–23
actual, 178, 208
inevitable, 36
maximum intraday, 112–13
median maximum, 67–69, 155, 183
one-contract, 178
quitting point, 180
worst, 178
drawdown curves, 206–7
drawdown ratio, 68, 155–56
E
edge, 35, 71, 73–76, 89, 105–6, 110–11, 
114–15, 130, 141–43, 148, 150, 158, 
160, 181, 244
electronic data, 93–95, 99
emotions, 27, 132, 143, 181, 185, 187–93
entries, 16–17, 24, 73, 75, 83–86, 88, 93, 
100–101, 104–10, 116, 131–35, 150, 
152, 157, 159–60
actual, 106–7
generated, 109
good, 85–86, 104, 107
monkey, 109–10
no-edge, 107
reversal, 157–58
similar-approach, 106–7, 151, 160
entry rules, 83–85, 148, 150
equity, 44, 51, 57–58, 61, 63, 67, 143–44,
164, 167, 169, 182, 184, 188–89, 191, 
206–7
drops, 63–65, 165–66, 168
peak, 27, 66, 188
equity chart, 25–26, 30, 57–58, 206
equity curve, 43, 57–59, 61–62, 64, 69, 71,
121, 123, 125, 136, 139–41, 163, 
188–90, 206–7, 213
daily, 58, 206
drawdown, 69
euro day strategy, 157, 163, 165, 167, 226
“Evaluation and Optimization of  Trading 
Strategies,” 73
exchange settlement price, 90–91
exit rules, 83, 85, 148, 150, 152, 157
exits, 16–17, 19, 21, 24, 73, 75, 84–86, 88, 
100, 104–10, 132–35, 137, 157, 159–60, 
192–93
baseline, 112–13
fi xed-bar, 105, 160
monkey, 110
rules, 83, 85, 148, 150, 152, 157
testing, 106
expectations, 24, 174, 208, 211, 215, 219, 
221–23, 228–29
expenses, living, 35–36
F
factory, 73–75, 133, 205
fi tness function, 121–25, 151
fi xed fractional sizing, 143–46, 181–83, 185
G
gambling, 30, 192–93
goals, 23–24, 30–31, 33, 72, 79–83, 110, 112, 
125–26, 130, 132, 137, 147–48, 155–61, 
164, 167
H
head and shoulders patterns, 11
high-frequency trading fi rms, 88–89, 99
historical data, 51, 90–91, 95, 97, 108, 150, 157
history, walk-forward, 109–11, 151, 163, 169, 
178, 221
Holy Grail, 134, 237, 243
I
ideas, 39, 45, 74, 81, 84, 133, 152, 244
incubating, 131, 205, 207–8, 210–11
incubation, 72, 75, 129–32, 143, 149, 151, 
163, 165, 167, 169–73, 188–89, 206, 
211, 222, 227–28
inputs, walk-forward, 121–22, 125
\n\n=== PAGE 281 ===\n267
INDEX
L
limited testing, 72, 103, 148, 150, 159–60
two-year test, 104
limited two-year test, 104
limit orders, 57, 101, 131–32, 157, 197,
200–201, 205, 216, 224, 226
losing systems, 126, 140–41, 213
M
MAE (maximum adverse excursion), 107
margin, 25–26, 141, 180, 196
initial, 63, 180
required, 123, 180
market orders, 57, 100–101, 193, 199–200
Martingale betting strategy, 142
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), 9
maximum drawdown, 24, 57, 65–69, 80–82, 
110, 113, 123, 125, 129, 136, 144, 164, 
178–80, 182–83, 185
maximum favorable excursion (MFE), 107
median, 63, 65, 67–69, 165–66, 168, 
182, 184
median drawdown, 63, 65–66, 68, 144–45,
165–66, 168, 182, 184
median return, 63–65, 68
Michigan, University of, 9
money management, 58, 73, 139–43, 145, 244
monkey exit strategy, 110
monkey tests, 105, 108–13
Monte Carlo analysis, 61–62, 64, 68, 73, 
129–31, 136, 140, 149, 151, 163, 
166–69, 173, 181, 214
Monte Carlo simulator, 5, 62–63, 65, 69, 
129, 133, 144, 151, 155, 164–66, 168, 
178–79, 215
moving averages, 11–14, 85, 95, 191
multiple brokers, 38, 195
multiple systems, 134, 136, 144–45, 167, 195
N
net profi t, 54–55, 57, 107–8, 110, 112–13, 
117–18, 123, 125, 206, 212–13, 215–16, 
220, 223, 227–28, 230
NinjaTrader, 43, 71–72, 90, 196
O
objectives, 24, 30, 68, 79–82, 89, 125, 127, 
130, 164, 169, 173, 182, 243
online t-test, 170
open profi t, 190, 199–200
optimization, 48–49, 72–73, 86, 96, 103, 106, 
116, 119, 121, 123–24, 126, 152, 157, 
160–61
optimized results, 48–51, 119–21, 
125–26
optimum, 123, 139–40, 143, 185
out-of-sample, 47, 49–51, 115, 118, 
120–22, 240
overoptimization, 21, 47–48, 58
P
packages, 71–72
parameters, 48, 85–86, 94, 110, 112,
115–17, 119, 121–23, 126, 164, 183, 
198, 222
Pardo, Robert, 73
pattern, candlestick, 85, 116
performance, 23–29, 47, 58–59, 88–89, 111, 
114, 120, 130–31, 163, 210–11, 217, 
219, 222–23, 226–29, 243–44
current, 208, 219
edge, 37
hurdles, 61, 75
metrics, 43, 53, 80, 125, 185
monthly, 210
predicted, 217
real-time, 132, 215
report, 43, 47, 53, 56–57, 62, 69, 112, 237
strategy-calculated, 228–29
performance metrics, 43, 53, 80, 125, 185
performance report, 43, 47, 53, 56–57, 62, 69,
112, 237
pit, 90, 94–95, 99
plan, 14, 25–26, 29, 46, 150, 152, 161, 179, 
190, 197, 222, 224, 228, 231, 245
portfolio, 25, 109, 142–43, 174
position size, 59, 139–43, 177, 244
position sizing, 53, 58, 64, 72, 123, 130, 135, 
139–43, 145–46, 152, 163–64, 171–72, 
177–82, 185, 243–44
\n\n=== PAGE 282 ===\n268
INDEX
preliminary analysis, 53–59
price, negative, 97–98
probability, 45, 64, 66, 69, 130, 136–37, 164,
167, 169, 182
profi t
actual, 107, 210
average trade net, 55–56
closed, 199–200
current, 219, 223
small, 17, 135
total net, 55, 69
profi tability, 84–85, 107, 173
profi table systems, 92, 172
profi t/loss, 63, 65, 165–66, 168
profi t target, 17, 24, 86, 88, 116, 157, 190,
198–99, 214
pullback, 189–90
Q
quitting, 65, 111, 151, 177, 179–80, 
215–16, 222
R
random entry, 84, 105–7, 109–10, 112–13,
148, 160
random exit, 84, 105, 110, 112–13, 
148, 160
random strategies, 112–13
ratios
return/drawdown, 68, 144, 164, 167, 
169, 183
reward-to-risk, 190
real-money trading, 236, 239, 241
relative strength index (RSI), 107
return, 17, 24, 26–28, 30, 62–66, 68, 123–25,
136, 140, 144–45, 155–56, 164–66, 
168–69, 180–81, 184
return/drawdown, 26, 28, 30, 63, 65, 68, 136,
144–45, 165–66, 168, 184
risk, 46, 56, 58, 62, 68–69, 129–30, 135–36,
140, 146, 150, 189–90, 192, 224, 
228–29, 231
risk of ruin, 64–66, 144–45, 182
ruin, risk of, 10, 62, 64–66, 144, 164, 167, 
182–83
S
Sakaeda, Kurt, 27
scale trading, 17–18, 20, 198
settlement price, 90–91, 95
shoulders patterns, 11
simulator, 63–64
slippage, 13, 16, 53–57, 69, 94, 101, 105, 
108–9, 118, 123, 134, 216–17, 220, 
228, 230
SMART goal, 81–82, 155–56
software, strategy-testing, 91, 100
spread, bid/ask, 198, 200
standard deviation bands, 213–14
start equity, 63, 65–66, 149, 165–66, 168, 184
stop loss, 116, 198–99, 214
stop-losses, 16, 86, 101, 105, 116–17, 190, 
198–99, 214
stop orders, 57, 100–101, 197
strategy, 61–62, 71–77, 87–91, 93–99, 103–5, 
107–14, 116–19, 125–33, 150–52, 
155–61, 166–67, 169–74, 189–92, 
205–8, 210–13
adding-to-losers, 18
algorithmic, 84, 188, 199
bad, 53, 111
breakeven, 35
breakout, 150
core, 29
day-trading, 87
developing, 39
high-speed scalping, 197
incubated, 130
independent, 155
intraday, 155–56
live, 203, 205, 207, 212, 217
mean-reverting, 87
monkey, 112
optimization-less, 116
optimized, 116, 127, 156
real-time, 57
uncorrelated, 169
walk-forward history, 127–28, 161, 239
strategy back-test engine, 131
strategy development, 34, 72–75, 130, 134, 157
strategy engine, 48, 57, 132, 226–27
strategy rules, 55, 131, 192
System Development Process Checklist, 148–49
\n\n=== PAGE 283 ===\n269
INDEX
T
testing forex data, 100
testing phase, walk-forward, 151
test period, 52, 55, 112–13, 120,
148, 157
Tharp, Dr. Van, 30, 56, 84, 139, 180
Tharp Expectancy, 56, 172
time frame contraction, 89
TradeStation, 21, 44, 48, 51, 58, 84, 
90, 150, 159, 188, 197, 200, 205, 
216, 224
TradeStation Easy Language, 112, 196
trading contest, 23–24, 30, 34, 235
trading software, 16, 45, 71–72, 100
trading strategies, 23, 37, 47, 53, 57, 61, 
73, 85, 96, 100, 104, 133, 140, 241, 
243–44
developing new, 38
optimizing, 140
U
Unger, Andrea, 142
V
Vince, Ralph, 139, 144
W
walk-forward, 50, 115, 120–21, 124, 155, 171,
223, 227, 230
analysis, 21, 50–51, 115–22, 124, 
126–27, 161
results, 110, 119–21, 126, 169, 188
test, 53, 104, 127, 171, 188
wheat, price of, 17–19, 43
World Cup Championship of Futures Trading, 
23, 87, 142, 235
\n\n=== PAGE 284 ===\nWILEY END USER LICENSE
AGREEMENT
Go to www.wiley.com/go/eula to access Wiley’s ebook
EULA.
\n